<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Table of Contents

| Table of Contents............................................................................................................................................   | Table of Contents............................................................................................................................................   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Executive Summary.........................................................................................................................................      | Executive Summary.........................................................................................................................................      |
| 1.                                                                                                                                                              | National Circumstances ........................................................................................................................1                |
| 2.                                                                                                                                                              | Climate Action for Sustainable Development and a Green Economy ..................................................2                                              |
| 3.                                                                                                                                                              | Climate Action Enablers........................................................................................................................3                |
| 4.                                                                                                                                                              | Mitigation Contribution ........................................................................................................................5               |
| 5.                                                                                                                                                              | Adaptation ............................................................................................................................................7        |
| Impacts of Climate Change in Lebanon ....................................................................................................7                      | Impacts of Climate Change in Lebanon ....................................................................................................7                      |
| Adaptation Priorities.................................................................................................................................7         | Adaptation Priorities.................................................................................................................................7         |
| 6.                                                                                                                                                              | Support Needed for NDC Implementation and Achievement............................................................13                                             |
| Annex I: Information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding (ICTU) of Lebanon's                                                                  | Annex I: Information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding (ICTU) of Lebanon's                                                                  |

mitigation part of the NDC  ..........................................................................................................................  14

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## 1. National Circumstances

Lebanon faces an unprecedented economic, financial, monetary, and banking crisis . An accumulation of large budget deficits has significantly increased the debt-to-GDP ratio. Moreover, the Lebanese Pound has devalued, while inflation rates soared, impacting the Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) of Lebanese citizens. The fact that Lebanon relies on imports for most of its food and energy supplies has aggravated the situation even  further. The COVID-19  pandemic has  exacerbated conditions  whereby  the government-imposed lockdowns that further lowered economic activity.

On August 4 th , 2020, an explosion occurred at the port of Beirut which damaged the Port infrastructure, and surrounding area; the cost of damage is estimated between 3.8 and 4.6 billion US Dollars 1 . This further sets back an already struggling economy and has halted a large area of commercial activity and essential services: the consequent physical capital losses of the blast are expected to cause an additional decline in GDP, estimated at 0.4 to 0.6 percentage points 1 .

Since  2011,  Lebanon  has  been  dealing  with  a  crippling  humanitarian  crisis  due  the displaced  Syrian population ,  which  has  stretched  an  already  fragile  public  infrastructure  with  demands  exceeding  the capacity of institutions to meet the required needs. The lack of security caused by the regional turmoil adds another layer of paralysis. Therefore, Lebanon once again considers that the achievement of its targets presumes:

- The reinstatement, as soon as possible, of the prevailing national circumstances prior to the latest regional crisis, a matter considered as Lebanon's legitimate right;
- The absence of the emergence of any new crisis which could adve rsely affect Lebanon's national circumstances.

Lebanon is experiencing a multi-faceted crisis, which will only worsen with climatic impacts. Therefore, Lebanon's priority for the next decade is to spur sustainable growth through the creation of decent j obs and improve the well-being of its population through welfare programmes and protection of natural resources. Consequently, the implementation of this NDC consists of inherent components in Lebanon's economic recovery path, while reaffirming Lebanon's c ommitment to the climate fight.

It  is  under  these  circumstances,  and  in  accordance  with  Article  4.9  of  the  Paris  Agreement  and  Law 115/2019,  that  Lebanon  presents  its  updated  2020  NDC,  which  can  only  be  achieved  through  the cooperation of all national stakeholders and the invaluable support of the international community during these difficult times.

1 Beirut Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment (RDNA), World Bank (2020)

## 2. Climate Action for Sustainable Development and a Green Economy

Lebanon's roadmap to macroeconomic stability amid the number of challenges it is facing will need to be green, inclusive, and conform with the leave no one behind principle. The aim is to drive sustainable, lowemission  growth,  as  well  as  increase  the  resilience  of  the  economy,  communities  and  ecosystems  to sustain  any  future  shocks,  including  climate  events.  The  government  has  put  forth  several  plans  and reforms agendas to attract foreign investments and aid to put the country on a long-term sustainable growth  trajectory,  including  the  CEDRE-CIP  (Conference  Economique  pour  le  Développement  par  les Reformes avec les Entreprises -Capital Investment Program) 2 , the Lebanon Economic Vision (LEV) 3 and the  Government  Financial  Recovery  Plan 4 .  Moreover,  several  ministerial  strategies  are  shifting  their missions by reiterating the priority to drive sustainable economic growth. Moreover, a climate-proofing analysis  of  the  above  plans  has  been  conducted  to  secure  harmonization  with  the  Paris  Agreement mandate.

This NDC update is synchronized with these plans and reforms and most of the proposed courses of action are already stated in endorsed ministerial strategies and plans, which together form Lebanon's international commitment.

Lebanon's NDC, in addition to r educing national greenhouse gas emissions, will also improve air quality, enhance  food  security,  reduce  poverty  and  vulnerability,  create job opportunities, protect  the environment and green cities, and improve social welfare and boost economic growth. Moreover, in the energy sector it will increase its robustness, security, reliability, sustainability and independence, which will reduce the burden on the government budget and alleviate the fiscal deficit.

Furthermore, climate action enables the move to a green and blue economy by removing barriers to clean investments  and  solidifying  demand  for  greener  products  and  services  through  sound  economic incentives  and  regulation.  Moving  towards  a  green  economy  in  Lebanon  satisfies  the  concept  of sustainable development since it aims for high human development, with a reduced ecological impact. Lebanon's draft Low Emission Development Strategy's (LEDS) objectives are in line with this princ iple, by visualizing a circular economy, enhanced research and development, and decoupled economic growth and GHG emissions. This NDC is a steppingstone to achieving the LEDS objectives in 2050.

Lebanon prioritizes a just transition through the consideration of the socio-economic status of the most vulnerable, adopting a gender-responsive approach. This is in line with the Government of Lebanon's adherence to the SecretaryGeneral's 2019  Climate Action  Summit  declaration  on  Social  and  Political drivers,  w hich  aims  at  'ensuring  that  the  economic,  e nvironmental  and  social  aspects  of  the transformation  of  economies  and  societies  towards  greater  sustainability  are  managed  in  ways  that maximize opportunities of decent work for all, reduce inequalities, promote social justice, and enhance country's efforts to improve the people's health.'

2 CEDRE -CIP (2018) (http://www.pcm.gov.lb/Admin/DynamicFile.aspx?PHName=Document&amp;PageID=11231&amp;published=1)

3 LEV, McKinsey (2018) (https://www.economy.gov.lb/media/11893/20181022-1228full-report-en.pdf)

4 Government Financial Recovery Plan (2020) (http://finance.gov.lb/enus/EventPdfs/English/The%20Lebanese%20Goverment%20Financial%20Recovery%20Plan.pdf)

## 3. Climate Action Enablers

Measures for sustainable development and climate  action  are  most  effective  if  based  on robust governance mechanisms, regulations and partnerships.  Lebanon  therefore  views  these elements as Climate Action Enablers which are crucial to sustained and more ambitious actions to  achieve  the  NDC.  Moreover,  these  enablers contribute  to  the  achievement  of  numerous Sustainable Development Goals, including SDGs 16 (Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions) and 17 (Partnerships  for  the  Goals).  Several  enablers below  are  already  underway,  and  others  have been prioritized for implementation.

## CAE1:  Improved  Governance  and  Institutional Capacities

Lebanon  prioritizes  climate  governance  as  the enabling  of  institutions  to  plan,  prepare  and react  to  climate  change.  Building  the  needed institutional capacities to reform, analyze, coordinate and regulate climate and sustainable development action is essential. This is particularly important for climate policy coherence, efficiency, integration and mainstreaming, which are the building blocks of effective and informed green reforms.

## CAE2: Incentivized Action and Fiscal Reform

Lebanon strives to derisk climate-relevant investments  both  for  the  public  and  private sectors, as it is of the essence to accelerate the deployment  of climate-friendly technologies, especially renewable energy 5 . Additionally, fiscal incentives  and  disincentives  are  necessary  to operat ionalize the 'Polluter Pays Principle' across all relevant emitting sectors to fast-track the  shift  to  greener  options,  such  as  Decree 167/2017 which reduces corporate tax/customs fees based on clean technology uptake, Article 55  of  2018  Budget  Law  which  provides  tax exemptions for electric vehicles and tax reductions for hybrid vehicles, and Law 77/2018

5 UNDP (2017). Lebanon: Derisking Renewable Energy Investment . New York,

and its  amended version 192/2020,  where  the Water Code lists penalties for polluters. Finally, climate-proofing public and private investments and  projects is necessary  to avoid climatenegative projects.

## CAE3: Strengthened Partnerships

The  role  of  Non-State  Actors  (NSAs),  including the private sector and Civil Society Organizations is  primordial  to  implement  climate action.  It  is therefore  important  to  scale-up  the  existing partnerships with NSAs to enable their increased involvement in mitigation and adaptation actions, as well as climate advocacy. Moreover, the  Government  of  Lebanon  is  prioritizing  the ease of doing business as depicted in its financial recovery plan, which will contribute to increased contributions from the private sector.

## CAE4:  Innovative  Research  and  Development Encouraged

Lebanon aims to reduce the carbon intensity of its  economy  through  stimulating  Research  and Development  for  low  carbon  and  sustainable technologies.  In  addition,  Lebanon  needs  to improve  its  scientific  aptitude  to  better  guide decision-making.  It  is  therefore  important  to foster an innovative environment by sustainably enhancing the capabilities of the private sector, driving large public investments for research and piloting,  partnering  with  academic  bodies  to provide the needed readiness for transformational change, and encouraging innovation labs.

## CAE5: Comprehensive Integration

Integrated solutions to the climate crisis, as well as  economic  recovery,  cannot  be  performed without the effective inclusion of gender institutions, youth groups and vulnerable communities. Lebanon plans to revise its policymaking  process  to  include  these  groups  which are key to the success of the NDC and are the most impacted by climate impacts.

NY: United Nations Development Programme

## CAE6: Enhanced Monitoring and Transparency

Clarity  and  effectiveness  of  action  can  only  be guaranteed  through  a  robust  monitoring  and transparency  framework,  tackling  climate  and sustainable development  action, as well as support.  In  order  to  enhance  the  impacts  of policymaking, and to successfully participate in tracking the global progress of the climate fight, a transparency framework will be established to improve institutional arrangements, data availability and periodicity, as well as monitoring and  evaluation  of  mitigation  and  adaptation projects.

## 4. Mitigation Contribution

Lebanon is updating the mitigation targets included in its 2015 Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) in accordance with paragraphs 9 of Article 4 of the Paris Agreement and Law 115/2019, paragraph 24 of Decision 1/CP.21 and paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 of Decision 1/CMA.2, to respond to the urgent global call for en hanced ambition in order to meet the Paris Agreement's goals, considering Comm on but Differentiated Responsibilities (CBDR) in light of national circumstances, and in line with the SecretaryGeneral's Climate Action Summit declaration on Mitigation Strategy, which Lebanon  joined in 2019.

This  NDC  represents  a  progression  beyond  L ebanon's  2015  NDC by  unconditionally  increasing  its Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission target relative to the Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario from 15% to 20%, and  conditionally  increasing  its  GHG  emission  target  relative  to  the  BAU  scenario  from  30%  to  31%. Moreover,  Lebanon  commits  to  unconditionally  generate  18%  of  the  power  demand  (i.e.  electricity demand) and 11% of its heat demand (in the building sector) from renewable energy sources in 2030, compared to a combined 15% in 2015. Conditionally, Lebanon commits to generate 30% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand)  and 16.5% of its heat demand (in the building sector) from renewable energy sources in 2030, compared to a combined 20% in 2015 (guided by the IRENA Renewable Energy Outlook:  Lebanon 6 ).  Lebanon  believes  that  enhanced  climate  ambition  is  needed  from  all  countries despite climate vulnerability, as increased mitigation leads to a decrease in adaptation needs.

The NDC GHG targets have been methodologically updated to reflect the national GHG inventory with the use  of  the  2006  IPCC  Guidelines  and  the  100-year  time-horizon  GWP  values  from  the  IPCC  Fifth Assessment Report.

Most of the proposed courses of action to implement the mitigation NDC are already alluded to in endorsed ministerial strategies and plans, as well as reports, such as the Policy Paper for Electricity sector (PPES) 2019,  the 2020 National Water Sector Strategy (NWSS), the 2020 Ministry of Agriculture Strategy, the Oil and Gas Strategic Environmental Assessment, and the 2020 IRENA Renewable Energy Outlook: Lebanon, the National Cooling Plan (NCP), among others, which together form Lebanon's international commitment. Lebanon's GHG target is eco nomy-wide, and includes mitigation efforts from the energy, transport,  forestry,  agriculture,  waste  and  industrial  sectors  to  achieve  its  NDC.  Moreover,  almost  all planned mitigation actions have sustainable development co-benefits.

The implementation of the above-mentioned Climate Action Enablers is crucial to the achievement of the targets put forward in this update.

6 IRENA Renewable Energy Outlook: Lebanon (https://www.irena.org//media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2020/Jun/IRENA\_Outlook\_Lebanon\_2020.pdf)

| Unconditional targets 2015 7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Unconditional targets 2020 8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1. A GHG emission reduction of 15% compared to the Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario in 2030 (amounting to 6,222 Gg. CO 2 eq.) 2. 15% of the power and heat demand in 2030 is generated by renewable energy sources. 3. A 3% reduction in power demand through energy- efficiency measures in 2030 compared to the demand under the BAU scenario. | 1. A GHG emission reduction of 20% compared to the Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario in 2030, (amounting to 7,790 Gg. CO 2 eq.) . 2. 18% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 11% of the heat demand (in the building sector) in 2030 is generated by renewable energy sources. 3. A 3% reduction in power demand through energy-efficiency measures in 2030 compared to the demand under the BAU scenario. |
| Conditional targets 2015 7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Conditional targets 2020 9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| 1. A GHG emission reduction of 30% compared to the Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario in 2030 (amounting to 11,860 Gg. CO 2 eq.). 2. 20% of the power and heat demand in 2030 is generated by renewable energy sources. 3. A 10% reduction in power demand through energy- efficiency in 2030 compared to the demand under the BAU scenario.       | 1. A GHG emission reduction of 31% compared to the Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario in 2030 (amounting to 12,075 Gg. CO 2 eq.) . 2. 30% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 16.5% of the heat demand (in the building sector) in 2030 is generated by renewable energy sources. 3. A 10% reduction in power demand through energy-efficiency in 2030 compared to the demand under the BAU scenario.       |

Lebanon will track progress and achievement of the unconditional and conditional targets listed above in its first Biennial Transparency Report (BTR) and onwards, contingent on adequate support.

Additional information on the mitigation targets is provided in the Annex to this submission. Lebanon has used the guidance on Information to provide Clarity, Transparency and Understanding (ICTU) in Decision 4/CMA.1.

7 GHG emission reductions recalculated as per the 2006 IPCC Guidelines and AR5 GWPs. Numbers reflect rounding.

8  The unconditional mitigation scenario includes the impacts of mitigation actions which Lebanon can nationally implement, and through international support in the form of loans or other repayable instruments.

9 The conditional mitigation scenario covers the mitigation actions under the unconditional scenario, as well as further mitigation actions which can be implemented upon the provision of additional international support in the form of grants.

5. Adaptation

## Impacts of Climate Change in Lebanon

Climatic changes are expected to have diverse implications on Lebanon's environment, economy, and social  conditions.  Extreme  weather  events  are  and  will  continue  to  impact  public  health,  human settlements,  infrastructure,  agricultural  output,  power  supply  and  the  economy  at  large.  The  fragile biodiversity, ecosystems, and natural habitats will be threatened by increased forest fires, pest outbreaks sea level rise, storm intensity and drought.

Moreover, a decrease in snow cover, water availability, agricultural productivity, including fisheries and aquaculture,  and  tourism  would  impose  heavy  economic  costs.  Moreover,  studies  show  that  for particularly dry years, when total annual precipitation is low, overall GDP is estimated to have lost more than 60% compared to years when total precipitation reached its optimal.

These effects, in turn, would lower incomes for households and businesses, reduce revenues and increase costs to the government.

Therefore,  adverse  climate  impacts  will  add  an  additional  layer  of  challenges  and  sets  back  any improvement  in  the  Lebanese  socio-economic  status.  Lebanon  views  climate  change  as  a  threat multiplier to its current struggles which makes tackling the climate crisis a global priority, and swift adaptation a national one.

## Adaptation Priorities

Lebanon  will  increase  its  resilience  to  climate  change  in  tandem  with  enhancing  resilience  against economic shocks and other possible disasters. Therefore, Lebanon is prioritizing the synchronization of adaptation action with the implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, the Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development, the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, and the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity. Moreover, Lebanon acknowledges that vulnerable groups, especially women, are disproportionately impacted by climatic events, and will therefore commit to render climate adaptation action gender responsive.

Below  are  guiding  principles  and  sectoral  adaptation  priorities  which,  together,  aim to  preserve  and restore the natural capital and enhance and protect the built capital, as well as livelihoods, to ensure sustainable growth and resilience to climate change.

Moreover, these principles and priorities are in line with the relevant national sectoral strategies a nd will inform Lebanon's National Adaptation Plan (NAP), w. Furthermore, the most relevant SDGs are listed per  sectoral  priority;  Lebanon  considers  the  SDGs 5  (gender equality),  13  (climate  action),  16  (peace, justice  and  strong  institutions)  and  17  (partnerships  for  the  goals)  to  be  inherent  in  the  successful achievement of the adaptation priorities and are therefore considered relevant to all actions.

The achievement of the different adaptation priorities is highly interactive. Moreover, the implementation of the above-mentioned Climate Action Enablers is crucial to the achievement of the adaptation priorities.

Finally,  as  per  paragraph  11  of  Article  7  of  the  Paris  Agreement,  Law  115/2019  and  paragraph  11  of Decision  9/CMA.1,    the  below  priorities  correspond  to (c)  National  adaptation  priorities,  strategies, policies, plans, goals and actions of the Annex of Decision 9/CMA.1 (Further guidance in relation to the adaptation communication, including, inter alia, as a component of nationally determined contributions, referred to in Article 7, paragraphs 10 and 11, of the Paris Agreement and Law 115/2019). Therefore, the below priorities constitute part of Lebanon's Adaptation Comm unication in accordance with paragraph 10 of Article 7 of the Paris Agreement and Law 115/2019.

Lebanon's  adaptive  capacity  and  resilience  depend  on  international  support  in  the  form  of  finance, technology transfer, capacity-building, and technical assistance.

## Guiding Adaptation Principles

|   1. | Achieve food and water security through the sustainable management of resources                                                          |
|------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|    2 | Enhance the resilience of the infrastructure, urban and rural areas to subsist climate- related disasters                                |
|    3 | Ensure and protect public health, well-being and safety of all communities through climate- resilient systems                            |
|    4 | Incorporate Nature-Based Solutions as a first line of defense from adverse impacts of climate change                                     |
|    5 | Combat desertification and land degradation by achieving Land Degradation Neutrality                                                     |
|    6 | Substantially reduce the risk of climate and non-climate related disasters to protect lives, the economy and physical and natural assets |

## Adaptation priorities

| Adaptation priority 1    | Strengthen the agricultural sector's resilience to enhance Lebanon's agricultural output in a climate-smart manner                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
|--------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Mitigation co-benefit(s) | Climate-smart agriculture includes GHG reducing measures such as managing quantities and types of fertilizers                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Most relevant SDGs       | SDGs 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 12, and 15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Key activities           | • Restore the livelihoods and productive capacity of farmers and producers; • Increase agricultural production and productivity; • Enhance efficiency and competitiveness of agri-food value chains including fisheries; • Encourage private investment along the agri-food value chain including innovative technical solutions and improved access to climate finance and insurance; • Strengthen the enabling institutional environment; • Increase resilience of households with reference to food and nutrition security. |
| Reference document       | Ministry of Agriculture's 2020 -2025 Strategy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

| Adaptation priority 2    | Promote the sustainable use of natural resources, restore degraded landscapes, and increase Lebanon's forest cover while meeting the ecological, social and economic needs of sustainable forest management                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
|--------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Mitigation co-benefit(s) | Reforestation, afforestation and land restoration activities enhance carbon sinks                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Most relevant SDGs       | SDGs 1, 8, 12, and 15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Key activities           | • Achieve the goals listed in the Brummana Declaration for the Role of Mediterranean Forests to Fulfil the NDCs 10 ; • Adapt forest systems to climate change by halting land degradation, controlling erosion of topsoil, improving water quality and soil productivity; • Establish sites with improved production capacity linking with the development of wood and non- wood forest product processing industry and with the people's needs in terms of goods and services and improved employment opportunities; • Promote sustainable rangeland management; |
| Reference document       | Ministry of Agriculture's National Forest Program (NFP), National Str ategy for Forest Fire Management and the National Afforestation/Reforestation Programme 40 Million Forest Trees Planting Programme (NARP)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |

| Adaptation priority 3    | Structure and develop sustainable water services, including irrigation, in order to improve people's living conditions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|--------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Mitigation co-benefit(s) | Irrigation using clean energy sources reduces GHG emissions                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Most relevant SDGs       | SDGs 1, 3, 8, 9, 11, 12, 15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Key activities           | • Implement the Beirut Water Declaration 11 ; • Enhance the efficient use of irrigation water and expand the supply of surface water sources for irrigation; • Encourage and support the use of renewable energy in agricultural irrigation and in drinking water supply; • Build an operational and sustainable legal and institutional framework to ensure a proper management of the water sector allowing the development of sustainable and efficient services; • Develop financing tools for the sector to set-up financial mechanisms allowing the sustainability and the financial balance of the services; • Involve all actors in the service chain and establish sustainable mechanisms for collaboration and coordination to improve the sector monitoring and transparency. |
| Reference document       | Ministry of Energy and Water's National Water Sector Strategy (NWSS) and Ministry of Agriculture's 2020-2025 Strategy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

| Adaptation priority 4    | Value and sustainably manage Lebanon's terrestrial and marine biodiversity for the preservation and conservation of its ecosystems and habitats and the species they harbour in order to adequately respond to anthropogenic and natural pressures and to ensure Lebanese citizens equal access to ecosystem goods and services                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|--------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Mitigation co-benefit(s) | Biodiversity management contributes to carbon sinks and the blue economy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Most relevant SDGs       | SDGs 2, 4, 11, 12, 14 and 15                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Key activities           | • Identify the status of 75% of known flora and fauna species and implement conservation actions on 50% of threatened species; • Protect at least 20% of natural terrestrial and marine ecosystems and represent all types of ecosystems in the protected areas network; • Increase the total percent coverage of nature reserves to reach at least 5% of Lebanon's area; • Sustainably manage 50% of all natural ecosystems and properly consider them in spatial planning implementation; • Alleviate the gap between Lebanon's ecological footprint and biocapacity is to reach an equal state; |

|                    | • Establish effective measures to control the introduction and diffusion of non- indigenous biodiversity into the environment; • Identify vulnerable ecosystems to climate change and develop and implement appropriate adaptation plans; • Implement rehabilitation plans in at least 20% of degraded sites so that they can safeguard the sustained delivery of ecosystem services.   |
|--------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Reference document | Ministry of Environment's National B iodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) and the 'Assessment of Climate Change Impact on Lebanon Coastal Zone' report                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

| Adaptation priority 5   | Reduce the vulnerability of climate change impacts on coastal zones, especially in cities                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
|-------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Most relevant SDGs      | SDGs 6, 9, 10 and 14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Key activities          | • Assess the sea-water intrusion in the major coastal aquifers; • Enhance the Artificial Recharge of some selected aquifers; • Refresh the water budgeting of all aquifers progressively; • Perform the modelling of the karstic, saline and porous aquifer; • Increase the protective capacity of coasts against storm surges and sea-level rise; • Promote sustainable use of natural resources, such as fisheries. |
| Reference document      | Ministry of Energy and Water's National Water Sector Strategy (NWSS) and Ministry of Agriculture 2020-2025 Strategy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |

| Adaptation priority 6   | Ensure overall public health and safety through climate-resilient health systems                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|-------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Most relevant SDGs      | SDGs 3, 6, 10, and 11                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Key activities          | • Assess the vulnerability of public health sector to climate change, identifying the current and future health effects and establishing early warning systems • Build the capacity of health sector professionals in the identification of health impacts from other sectors (e.g. transport, energy, food, water, housing and urban development; • Empowerandensuresustainability of existing environmental health functions and services to face challenges of water security for health, water quality degradation, droughts, heat waves, food security and safety, vectors redistribution, air quality degradation, floods and other climate related natural disasters; • Upgrade epidemiological surveillance to incorporate new health outcomes in the Epidemiological Surveillance Unit; • Develop a mechanism to incorporate climate data in the national health information system; • Develop health system response strategies, plans and projects and integrate them into national health strategies. |
| Reference document      | The National Health and Environment Strategy 2016-2021, MoPH, WHO,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |

| Adaptation priority 7   | Reduce disaster risk and minimize damages by mitigating and adapting to climate- related natural hazards and extreme weather                                                                                                                |
|-------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Most relevant SDGs      | 1, 2, 3, 9, 10 and 11                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Key activities          | • Conduct a multi-hazard risk assessment; • Update/revisit flood, fire and drought risk maps; • Upgrade and develop an early warning platform for multi-hazards; • Coordinate the updating of the National Forest fire management strategy. |

## 6. Support Needed for NDC Implementation and Achievement

The NDC's implementatio n depends on adequate and predictable climate and sustainable  development  finance,  as  well  as economic and political stability, and the enhanced capacity of Lebanese institutions.

Therefore, Lebanon  is  working  towards    the establishment of the Lebanon Green Investment  Facility  (LGIF) as  stipulated  in  the Government's Financial Recovery Plan, to provide climate and green finance through accessible  and  affordable  finance  instruments for both the public and private sectors, as well as to provide needed technical assistance to various entities to create bankable projects. The LGIF  is  foreseen  to  substantially  contribute  to the  implementation  of  the  NDC  by  increasing investments to climate-friendly projects, through strong donor and investor coordination mechanism and capitalization strategy.

Moreover, Lebanon  is  currently  developing  a climate-proofing  methodology which  aims  to assess and reduce the impacts of climatenegative projects, as well as potentially guide the evaluation  of  investments,  through  a  climatelens. Ultimately, Lebanon intends to explore the possibility of greening foreign investments including Official Development Assistance (ODA) to  accelerate the achievement of the NDC and avoid locking in  carbon  emissions  on  the  longterm. Finally, the consideration of Environmental  and  Social  Standards  (ESS),  as well as gender-responsiveness should be included in projects' evaluation and implementation.

Further  support  is  strongly  needed  from  the international  donor  community  to  overcome the many challenges Lebanon is facing , including  mitigating  and  adapting  to  climate change. This support includes finance, capacitybuilding and technology transfer.

Capacity-building  of  government  institutions and Non-State Actors to mitigate and adapt to climate  change .  More  importantly,  capacitybuilding support is needed to operationalize the Climate Action Enablers which act as means of implementation for climate action and sustainable development. Capacity development  for  reform  and  recovery  is  of essence to put Lebanese institutions on track to carry-out the required actions.

In  this  period  of  economic  rebuild, technology transfer is essential to access the best available technologies to avoid additional GHG emissions and increase adaptive capacities .  Sectors  such as industry, agriculture, waste, energy and buildings could greatly benefit from technologies which enhance resource and production efficiency to encourage circular economy. Moreover, the innovative digitalization of climate  action is  foreseen  to  maximize  the efficiency and sustainability of the green transition.

Lebanon plans to make its support needs clear, starting  with  the  Green  Climate  Fund  (GCF)'s country programme for Lebanon. The programme plans to provide guidance for investors  and  donors  on  NDC  priorities,  which will be in line with the planned investments for economic recovery.

Furthermore, the NDC Partnership Plans under development will deliver an overview of sectoral  enabling  activities  and  needs for  the implementation  of  the  NDC,  both  for  climate action and climate transparency.

Annex I: Information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding (ICTU) of Lebanon's mitigation part of the NDC

## Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) of Lebanon

1. Lebanon commits to unconditionally reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 20% below its Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario (amounting to 7,790 Gg. CO2eq.) and to conditionally reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 31% below its Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario in 2030 (amounting to 12,075 Gg. CO2eq.)
2. Lebanon commits to unconditionally generate 18% of its  power demand(i.e. electricity demand)   and 11% of its heat demand (in the building sector) by renewable energy sources and to conditionally generate 30% (i.e. electricity demand) of its  power demand and 16.5% of its heat demand (in the building sector) by renewable energy sources in 2030
3. Lebanon commits to unconditionally reduce power demand through energy efficiency measures by 3% under the Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario and to conditionally reduce power demand through energy efficiency measures by 10% under the Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario in 2030

Numbers reflect rounding

| Information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding (ICTU) of Lebanon's NDC   | Information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding (ICTU) of Lebanon's NDC                                                                                                                                                                                 | Information necessary for clarity, transparency and understanding (ICTU) of Lebanon's NDC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Para                                                                                        | Guidance in decision 4/CMA.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | ICTU guidance as applicable to Lebanon's NDC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| 1                                                                                           | Quantifiable information on the reference point (including, as appropriate, a base year):                                                                                                                                                                                 | Quantifiable information on the reference point (including, as appropriate, a base year):                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| (a)                                                                                         | Reference year(s), base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s)                                                                                                                                                                                           | 1. Reference point: GHG emissions level in the projected BAU scenario in 2030 2. Reference point: power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and heat demand (in the building sector) in the projected BAU scenario in 2030 3. Reference point: Power demand (i.e. electricity demand) in the projected BAU scenario in 2030 The BAU scenario does not take into account mitigation actions implemented after 2011. |
| (b)                                                                                         | Quantifiable information on the reference indicators, their values in the reference year(s) , base year(s), reference period(s) or other starting point(s), and, as applicable, in the target year                                                                        | 1. GHG emissions level in the projected BAU scenario in 2030: 38,950 Gg CO 2 eq. 2. Power demand (i.e. electricity demand) in the projected BAU scenario in 2030: 34,742 GWh, and heat demand in the building sector in the projected BAU scenario in 2030: 18 PJ 3. Power demand (i.e. electricity demand) in the projected BAU scenario in 2030: 34,742 GWh                                                   |
| (c)                                                                                         | For strategies, plans and actions referred to in Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement, or polices and measures as components of nationally determined contributions where paragraph 1(b) above is not applicable, Parties to provide other relevant information | Not applicable.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

| (d)   | Target relative to the reference indicator, expressed numerically, for example in percentage or amount of reduction   | 1. Target: unconditionally reduce GHG emissions by 20% below the BAU scenario (amounting to 7,790 Gg. CO 2 eq.) and to conditionally reduce GHG emissions by 31% below the BAU scenario (amounting to 12,075 Gg. CO 2 eq.) in 2030 2. Target: unconditionally generate 18% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 11% of the heat demand in the building sector by renewable energy sources and to conditionally generate 30% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 16.5% of the heat demand in the building sector by renewable energy sources in 2030 3. Target: unconditionally reduce power demand through energy efficiency measures by 3% under the BAU scenario and to conditionally reduce power demand through energy efficiency measures by 10% under the BAU scenario in 2030   |
|-------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (e)   | Information on sources of data used in quantifying the reference point(s)                                             | The sources of data used to quantify the reference points consist of Lebanon's Third National Communication (TNC) 's time series analysis, as well as information stemming from consultations with the different concerned ministries through consultations. Moreover, information included in ministerial strategies as well as estimates from international organizations have been used to quantify the reference points. The BAU and mitigation scenarios were developed for all sectors using the Low Emissions Analysis Platform (LEAP) software.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| (f)   | Information on the circumstances under which the Party may update the values of the reference indicators              | The GHG emissions level for the BAU scenario, unconditional and conditional targets in 2030 may be updated and recalculated depending on methodological changes in the GHG inventory, such as recalculating the GHG inventory with the 2006 IPCC Guidelines or changes in Global Warming Potential (GWP) in IPCC Assessment Reports, or the adoption of the 2019 IPCC Refinement. Information on updates made will be included in the Biennial Transparency Reports (BTR).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |

Numbers reflect rounding

| 2   | Time frames and/or periods for implementation:                                                                                                                                                                                       | Time frames and/or periods for implementation:                                                                                          |
|-----|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (a) | Time frame and/or period for implementation, including start and end date, consistent with any further relevant decision adopted by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA) | Lebanon has already begun implementing the actions and activities needed to meet this commitment. It will continue to do so until 2030. |
| (b) | Whether it is a single-year or multi-year target, as applicable                                                                                                                                                                      | Single-year target in 2030                                                                                                              |

| 3   | Scope and coverage:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
|-----|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (a) | General description of the target                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Please refer to 1 (d) above.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| (b) | Sectors, gases, categories and pools covered by the nationally determined contribution, including, as applicable, consistent with Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) guidelines                                                      | Lebanon's NDC is an economy wide absolute GHG emissions target. Information provided in Lebanon's inventory as part of its Biennial Transparency Report (BTR) will be consistent with the IPCC guidelines. Sectors Energy, industrial processes and product use, agriculture, forestry and land-use, and waste. Gases Carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), methane (CH 4 ) and nitrous oxide (N 2 O). The inclusion of perfluorocarbons (PFCs), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), sulphur hexafluoride (SF 6 ) and nitrogen trifluoride (NF 3 ) will be added to the NDC coverage once included in Lebanon's GHG inventory. For agriculture, forestry and land-use, emissions and removals the following reporting categories are included: forest land, cropland, grassland, and wetland (wetland remaining wetland only from 2026), including land use changes between the categories, and between these categories and settlements and other land. The five carbon pools above-ground biomass, below-ground biomass, litter, dead wood and soil organic matters are included. In addition, the carbon pool harvested wood products is included. |
| (c) | How the Party has taken into consideration paragraph 31(c) and (d) of decision 1/CP.21                                                                                                                                                             | Lebanon's inventory describes the sources considered insignificant and reported as not estimated. A similar approach, consistent with decision 18/CMA.1, will be used for reporting under the Paris Agreement.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| (d) | Mitigation co-benefits resulting from Parties' adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans, including description of specific projects, measures and initiatives of Parties' adaptation actions and/or economic diversification plans | Not applicable.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |

| 4    | Planning processes:                                                                                                                                                                                 | Planning processes:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (a)  | Information on the planning processes that the Party undertook to prepare its nationally determined contribution and, if available, on the Party's implementation plans, including, as appropriate: | Information on the planning processes that the Party undertook to prepare its nationally determined contribution and, if available, on the Party's implementation plans, including, as appropriate:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| (i)  | Domestic institutional arrangements, public participation and engagement with local communities and indigenous peoples, in a gender-responsive manner                                               | The NDC update has gone through an inter-ministerial validation process to ensure the unification of views on the way forward for Lebanon in the next 10 years. 1. Meetings with sectoral mitigation experts from line ministries were conducted to assess where additional ambition in the NDC could be allocated. 2. An adaptation expert meeting comprising ministerial experts, academia and technical consultants was conducted to assess the enhanced adaptation targets, and their appropriateness considering Lebanon's specia l circumstances. 3. A Non-State Actors (NSA) consultation meeting which included academic experts, youth, the private sector and civil society organizations was also organized to ensure their participation in defining the 2020 NDC update. 4. Gender representatives were engaged in the different consultation meetings. 5. Finally, the results were presented to the official inter-ministerial NDC committee, headed by the Ministry of Environment. Once feedback was received, the NDC was sent to the Council of Ministers for official approval. The NDC implementation process is coordinated by the Ministry of Environment and the implementation of the numerous sectoral policies is the responsibility of the line ministries. |
| (ii) | Contextual matters, including, inter alia, as appropriate:                                                                                                                                          | Contextual matters, including, inter alia, as appropriate:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| a.   | National circumstances, such as geography, climate, economy, sustainable development and poverty eradication                                                                                        | Please refer to 1. Section 1 of this NDC: National Circumstances 2. Part I of Lebanon's Third Biennial Update Report (BUR3) submitted to t he UNFCCC in October 2019. https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/LEBANON- %20Third%20Biennial%20Update%20Report%202019.pdf                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| b.   | Best practices and experience related to the preparation of the nationally determined contribution                                                                                                  | 1. The implementation of Lebanon's NDC, as well as the development of the Low- Emission Development Strategy (LEDS), has been mandated by the official economic recovery plan of Lebanon, prioritizing climate action in the reform process. Therefore, the integration of the NDC into higher-level governmentally endorsed                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |

c. Other contextual aspirations and priorities acknowledged when joining the Paris Agreement plan enhances climate action.

2. This NDC highlights the important linkages between climate action and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Lebanon assessed the relationship between the sectoral adaptation and mitigation policies and the 169 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) sub-targets which resulted in numerous synergies in implementation and tracking. This exercise contributes to fully synchronizing the planning of climate action and sustainable development, which is made clear in this NDC.
3. Lebanon thoroughly assessed the extent of gender-responsiveness in its climaterelated policies through a gender analysis. A set of recommendations for gender integration into strategies, including the NDC was produced to ensure that climate action is implemented through a gender lens. This NDC strives to fully integrate gender in order to enhance implementation and consider vulnerable groups.

| Agriculture       | http://climatechange.moe.gov.lb/viewfile.aspx?id=281   |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|
| Forestry          | http://climatechange.moe.gov.lb/viewfile.aspx?id=285   |
| Energy            | http://climatechange.moe.gov.lb/viewfile.aspx?id=282   |
| Renewable Energy  | http://climatechange.moe.gov.lb/viewfile.aspx?id=288   |
| Energy Efficiency | http://climatechange.moe.gov.lb/viewfile.aspx?id=284   |
| Solid Waste       | http://climatechange.moe.gov.lb/viewfile.aspx?id=290   |
| Solid Waste NAMA  | http://climatechange.moe.gov.lb/viewfile.aspx?id=289   |
| Public Transport  | http://climatechange.moe.gov.lb/viewfile.aspx?id=287   |
| Private Transport | http://climatechange.moe.gov.lb/viewfile.aspx?id=286   |
| Water             | http://climatechange.moe.gov.lb/viewfile.aspx?id=292   |
| Biodiversity      | http://climatechange.moe.gov.lb/viewfile.aspx?id=283   |
| Industry          | http://climatechange.moe.gov.lb/viewfile.aspx?id=291   |

Not applicable.

| (b)   | Specific information applicable to Parties, including regional economic integration organizations and their member States, that have reached an agreement to act jointly under Article 4, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement, including the Parties that agreed to act jointly and the terms of the agreement, in accordance with Article 4, paragraphs 16 - 18, of the Paris Agreement               | Not applicable.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|-------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (c)   | How the Party's preparation of its nationally determined contribution has been informed by the outcomes of the global stocktake, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 9, of the Paris Agreement                                                                                                                                                                                                     | The first global stocktake is to take place in 2023. Lebanon participated in the Talanoa Dialogue in 2018 where it committed to enhance the ambition of its NDC and welcomed the IPCC special report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways. |
| (d)   | Each Party with a nationally determined contribution under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement that consists of adaptation action and/or economic diversification plans resulting in mitigation co-benefits consistent with Article 4, paragraph 7, of the Paris Agreement to submit information on: How the economic and social consequences of response measures have been considered in developing the | Not applicable.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| (i)   | nationally determined contribution                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| (ii)  | Specific projects, measures and activities to be implemented to contribute to mitigation co-benefits, including information on adaptation plans that also yield mitigation co- benefits, which may cover, but are not limited to, key sectors, such as energy, resources, water                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

| resources, coastal resources, human settlements and urban planning, agriculture and forestry; and economic diversification actions, which may cover, but are not limited to, sectors such as manufacturing and industry, energy and mining, transport and communication, construction, tourism, real estate, agriculture and fisheries   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

| 5   | Assumptions and methodological approaches, including those for estimating and accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, removals:                                                                                                                | Assumptions and methodological approaches, including those for estimating and accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and, as appropriate, removals:                                                                                                                                                                        |
|-----|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (a) | Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals corresponding to the Party's nationally determined contribution, consistent with decision 1/CP.21, paragraph 31, and accounting guidance adopted by the CMA | Lebanon is accounting for its anthropogenic GHG emissions and removals using the 2006 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, and 2013 Supplement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Wetlands (collectively, the '2006 IPCC Guidelines') . |
| (b) | Assumptions and methodological approaches used for accounting for the implementation of policies and measures or strategies in the nationally determined contribution                                                                                                             | See 5(a) above. Lebanon will also apply specific assumptions and methodologies, where relevant, when accounting for progress of various policies and measures in its Biennial Update Report or Biennial Transparency Report.                                                                                                              |
| (c) | If applicable, information on how the Party will take into account existing methods and guidance under the Convention to account for anthropogenic emissions and removals, in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 14, of the Paris Agreement, as appropriate                     | See 5(a) above.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| (d) | IPCC methodologies and metrics used for estimating anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals                                                                                                                                                                            | The IPCC 2006 guidelines and parts of IPCC 2013 Wetlands Supplement is being used for estimating GHG emissions and removals. Global warming potentials (GWP) for a 100-year time horizon from the IPCC ' s fifth Assessment Report (AR5) is being used to calculate CO 2 equivalents.                                                     |

| (e)   | Sector-, category- or activity-specific assumptions, methodologies and approaches consistent with IPCC guidance, as appropriate, including, as applicable:                                                                                                                                  | Sector-, category- or activity-specific assumptions, methodologies and approaches consistent with IPCC guidance, as appropriate, including, as applicable:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|-------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (i)   | Approach to addressing emissions and subsequent removals from natural disturbances on managed lands                                                                                                                                                                                         | GHG emissions and removals from natural disturbances, if any, will be accounted for in accordance with the prescribed 2006 IPCC Guidelines.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| (ii)  | Approach used to account for emissions and removals from harvested wood products                                                                                                                                                                                                            | GHG emissions and removals from harvested wood products, if any, will be accounted for in accordance with the prescribed 2006 IPCC Guidelines.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| (iii) | Approach used to address the effects of age-class structure in forests                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Not applicable.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| (f)   | Other assumptions and methodological approaches used for understanding the nationally determined contribution and, if applicable, estimating corresponding emissions and removals, including:                                                                                               | Other assumptions and methodological approaches used for understanding the nationally determined contribution and, if applicable, estimating corresponding emissions and removals, including:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| (i)   | How the reference indicators, baseline(s) and/or reference level(s), including, where applicable, sector-, category- or activity- specific reference levels, are constructed, including, for example, key parameters, assumptions, definitions, methodologies, data sources and models used | 1. To quantify the GHG emissions level in the projected BAU scenario in 2030, the following assumptions were made for emission growth drivers: Population growth was estimated to be 1.65% annually till 2030, based on World Bank estimates. Moreover, when it comes to energy emissions, it was assumed that electricity demand will increase by 3.5% annually and that electricity demand which cannot be satisfied by the installed generation capacity, continues to be largely satisfied through private diesel generators. Also, in the BAU scenario, electricity production is decreasing by 1.3% per year due to the degradation of power plants. Finally, exploration activities in the offshore oil and gas sector has started in 2020 with the drilling of the first deep water well. However emission-intensive production and development operations are not expected to start before 2028, potentially contributing to the increase in GHG emissions level. For transport emissions, it was assumed that the fleet will be increasing by 3% annually. As for agriculture, emissions remain stable in the BAU scenario. As for forestry, due to an increase in deforestation, increase in forest fires and urban sprawl, the LULUCF sink is limited at a rate of 1% per year. Both the agriculture and forestry assumptions were made based on the time series analysis. As for waste emissions, generation is estimated to increase with population growth and with waste generation per capita increasing from 1.05 to 1.30 kg/capita/day. |

|       |                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Finally, industrial emissions are estimated to increase by 2.5% annually. 2. To quantify the reference point, the following assumptions were made for heat and power demand (i.e. electricity demand) growth: ● Heat demand: heat demand has been considered only for the building sector based on data availability. ● Power demand: Electricity demand increases by 3.5% annually; the electricity demand which cannot be satisfied by the installed generation capacity, continues to be largely met through private diesel generators. 3. To quantify the reference point, the following assumptions were made for power demand (i.e. electricity demand) growth: Electricity demand increases by 3.5% annually; the electricity demand which cannot be satisfied by the installed generation capacity, continues to be largely met through private diesel generators.   |
|-------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (ii)  | For Parties with nationally determined contributions that contain non greenhouse-gas components, information on assumptions and methodological approaches used in relation to those components, as applicable | Not applicable.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| (iii) | For climate forcers included in nationally determined contributions not covered by IPCC guidelines, information on how the climate forcers are estimated                                                      | Not applicable.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| (iv)  | Further technical information, as necessary                                                                                                                                                                   | Not applicable.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| (g)   | The intention to use voluntary cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, if applicable                                                                                                              | While at present, the use of Article 6 mechanisms is not envisaged, Lebanon does not exclude the possibility of making use of international market mechanisms to achieve its NDC targets.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |

| 6   | How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | How the Party considers that its nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its national circumstances:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|-----|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (a) | nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its Considering Lebanon's difficult national circumstances and its regional context as depicted in the national circumstances in this NDC, as well as its low share in global emissions, Lebanon therefore considers the targets put forward in this update as fair and ambitious. Moreover, Lebanon applied the ICTU guidance to this 2020 NDC in order to enhance its clarity, | nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its Considering Lebanon's difficult national circumstances and its regional context as depicted in the national circumstances in this NDC, as well as its low share in global emissions, Lebanon therefore considers the targets put forward in this update as fair and ambitious. Moreover, Lebanon applied the ICTU guidance to this 2020 NDC in order to enhance its clarity,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its Considering Lebanon's difficult national circumstances and its regional context as depicted in the national circumstances in this NDC, as well as its low share in global emissions, Lebanon therefore considers the targets put forward in this update as fair and ambitious. Moreover, Lebanon applied the ICTU guidance to this 2020 NDC in order to enhance its clarity,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its Considering Lebanon's difficult national circumstances and its regional context as depicted in the national circumstances in this NDC, as well as its low share in global emissions, Lebanon therefore considers the targets put forward in this update as fair and ambitious. Moreover, Lebanon applied the ICTU guidance to this 2020 NDC in order to enhance its clarity,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             | nationally determined contribution is fair and ambitious in the light of its Considering Lebanon's difficult national circumstances and its regional context as depicted in the national circumstances in this NDC, as well as its low share in global emissions, Lebanon therefore considers the targets put forward in this update as fair and ambitious. Moreover, Lebanon applied the ICTU guidance to this 2020 NDC in order to enhance its clarity,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| (b) | transparency and understanding. The NDC GHG targets have been methodologically updated to reflect the national GHG inventory with the use of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines and the 100-year time-horizon GWPvalues from the IPCC Fairness considerations, including reflecting on equity                                                                                                                                                                       | transparency and understanding. The NDC GHG targets have been methodologically updated to reflect the national GHG inventory with the use of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines and the 100-year time-horizon GWPvalues from the IPCC Fairness considerations, including reflecting on equity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | transparency and understanding. The NDC GHG targets have been methodologically updated to reflect the national GHG inventory with the use of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines and the 100-year time-horizon GWPvalues from the IPCC Fairness considerations, including reflecting on equity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | transparency and understanding. The NDC GHG targets have been methodologically updated to reflect the national GHG inventory with the use of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines and the 100-year time-horizon GWPvalues from the IPCC Fairness considerations, including reflecting on equity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | transparency and understanding. The NDC GHG targets have been methodologically updated to reflect the national GHG inventory with the use of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines and the 100-year time-horizon GWPvalues from the IPCC Fairness considerations, including reflecting on equity                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| (c) | How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 3, of the Paris Agreement                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | Fifth Assessment Report. This NDC represents a progression beyond Lebanon's 2015 NDC by unconditionally increasing its GHG emission target relative to the BAU scenario from 15% to 20%, and conditionally increasing its GHG emission target relative to the BAU scenario from 30% to 31%. Moreover, Lebanon commits to unconditionally generate 18% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 11% of its heat demand in the building sector from renewable energy sources in 2030, compared to a combined 15% in 2015. Conditionally, Lebanon commits to generate 30% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 16.5% of its heat demand in the building sector from renewable energy sources in 2030, compared to a combined 20% in 2015. The BAU level in 2030 changed due to the use of the IPCC 2006 guidelines as opposed to the 1996 Revised IPCC Guidelines used in the 2015 NDC, adding 0.97 percentage points to the 15% 2015 unconditional target, and adding 0.45 percentage points to the 30% 2015 conditional target. Despite this change, the 2020 NDC targets have increased to reach 20% unconditionally and 31% conditionally, due to increased mitigation effort. | Fifth Assessment Report. This NDC represents a progression beyond Lebanon's 2015 NDC by unconditionally increasing its GHG emission target relative to the BAU scenario from 15% to 20%, and conditionally increasing its GHG emission target relative to the BAU scenario from 30% to 31%. Moreover, Lebanon commits to unconditionally generate 18% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 11% of its heat demand in the building sector from renewable energy sources in 2030, compared to a combined 15% in 2015. Conditionally, Lebanon commits to generate 30% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 16.5% of its heat demand in the building sector from renewable energy sources in 2030, compared to a combined 20% in 2015. The BAU level in 2030 changed due to the use of the IPCC 2006 guidelines as opposed to the 1996 Revised IPCC Guidelines used in the 2015 NDC, adding 0.97 percentage points to the 15% 2015 unconditional target, and adding 0.45 percentage points to the 30% 2015 conditional target. Despite this change, the 2020 NDC targets have increased to reach 20% unconditionally and 31% conditionally, due to increased mitigation effort. | Fifth Assessment Report. This NDC represents a progression beyond Lebanon's 2015 NDC by unconditionally increasing its GHG emission target relative to the BAU scenario from 15% to 20%, and conditionally increasing its GHG emission target relative to the BAU scenario from 30% to 31%. Moreover, Lebanon commits to unconditionally generate 18% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 11% of its heat demand in the building sector from renewable energy sources in 2030, compared to a combined 15% in 2015. Conditionally, Lebanon commits to generate 30% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 16.5% of its heat demand in the building sector from renewable energy sources in 2030, compared to a combined 20% in 2015. The BAU level in 2030 changed due to the use of the IPCC 2006 guidelines as opposed to the 1996 Revised IPCC Guidelines used in the 2015 NDC, adding 0.97 percentage points to the 15% 2015 unconditional target, and adding 0.45 percentage points to the 30% 2015 conditional target. Despite this change, the 2020 NDC targets have increased to reach 20% unconditionally and 31% conditionally, due to increased mitigation effort. | Fifth Assessment Report. This NDC represents a progression beyond Lebanon's 2015 NDC by unconditionally increasing its GHG emission target relative to the BAU scenario from 15% to 20%, and conditionally increasing its GHG emission target relative to the BAU scenario from 30% to 31%. Moreover, Lebanon commits to unconditionally generate 18% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 11% of its heat demand in the building sector from renewable energy sources in 2030, compared to a combined 15% in 2015. Conditionally, Lebanon commits to generate 30% of the power demand (i.e. electricity demand) and 16.5% of its heat demand in the building sector from renewable energy sources in 2030, compared to a combined 20% in 2015. The BAU level in 2030 changed due to the use of the IPCC 2006 guidelines as opposed to the 1996 Revised IPCC Guidelines used in the 2015 NDC, adding 0.97 percentage points to the 15% 2015 unconditional target, and adding 0.45 percentage points to the 30% 2015 conditional target. Despite this change, the 2020 NDC targets have increased to reach 20% unconditionally and 31% conditionally, due to increased mitigation effort. |
|     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | NDC 2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | NDC 2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | NDC 2020                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | 1996 IPCC Revised Guidelines                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 2006 IPCC Guidelines                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | 2006 IPCC Guidelines                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | BAU Level in 2030                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 43,484 Gg CO 2 eq.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 38,950 Gg CO 2 eq.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 38,950 Gg CO 2 eq.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | Unconditional reduction in 2030                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | 6,523 Gg CO 2 eq.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 6,222 Gg CO 2 eq.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 7,790 Gg CO 2 eq.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

|     |                                                                            | Conditional reduction in 2030                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 13,045 Gg CO 2 eq.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 11,860 GgCO 2 eq.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 12,075 Gg CO 2 eq.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|-----|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (d) | How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement | Lebanon's 2020 NDC target pertaining to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by 20% below its Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario and to conditionally reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 31% below its Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario, is an economy-wide target. | Lebanon's 2020 NDC target pertaining to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by 20% below its Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario and to conditionally reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 31% below its Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario, is an economy-wide target. | Lebanon's 2020 NDC target pertaining to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by 20% below its Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario and to conditionally reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 31% below its Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario, is an economy-wide target. | Lebanon's 2020 NDC target pertaining to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by 20% below its Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario and to conditionally reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 31% below its Business-As-Usual (BAU) scenario, is an economy-wide target. |
| (e) | How the Party has addressed Article 4, paragraph 6, of the Paris Agreement | Not applicable.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Not applicable.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Not applicable.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Not applicable.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |

| 7   | How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2:        | How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|-----|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (a) | How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards achieving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2         | Lebanon's 2020 NDC contributes towards achi eving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2, the objective of the Paris Agreement as set out in its Article 2, and Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Paris Agreement through enhancing its mitigation efforts as per 6(c) above, therefore reducing GHG emissions further and accelerating the energy transition. |
| (b) | How the nationally determined contribution contributes towards Article 2, paragraph 1(a), and Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Paris Agreement | Lebanon's 2020 NDC contributes towards achi eving the objective of the Convention as set out in its Article 2, the objective of the Paris Agreement as set out in its Article 2, and Article 4, paragraph 1, of the Paris Agreement through enhancing its mitigation efforts as per 6(c) above, therefore reducing GHG emissions further and accelerating the energy transition. |