Hong Kong's

## C LIMATE ACTION PLAN

<!-- image -->

October 2021

## Contents

| Message from the Chief Executive                           |   2 |
|------------------------------------------------------------|-----|
| Foreword                                                   |   3 |
| Chapter 1 : Climate Emergency                              |   5 |
| Chapter 2 : Past Achievements in Decarbonisation           |   9 |
| Chapter 3 : Challenges                                     |  20 |
| Chapter 4 : Decarbonisation Strategies • Targets • Actions |  24 |
| Chapter 5 : Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience       |  41 |
| Chapter 6 : Opportunities                                  |  51 |
| Concluding Remarks                                         |  58 |
| Annex : Decarbonisation Strategies and Actions             |  59 |

2

3

5

9

59

## Message from the Chief Executive

<!-- image -->

The world is struggling with the COVID-19 pandemic but we must also gear up to act to limit global warming and the catastrophic consequences it can have for us all.  On both COVID-19 and climate change, governments all over the world must act in concert.

Our country is committed to achieving peak carbon dioxide emissions before 2030 and carbon neutrality before 2060.  As an international city of China, Hong Kong has been an active participant in global efforts to combat climate change.  To signify Hong Kong's commitment, I announced last year our pledge to achieve carbon neutrality before 2050.

Hong Kong's carbon emissions already peaked in 2014 through a series of measures, notably the significant reduction in coal for electricity generation.  In our first Hong Kong's Climate Action Plan 2030+ published in 2017, we pledged that by 2030, the total carbon emissions would reduce by 26-36% against the 2005 baseline. I am pleased to report that good progress has been made: in 2020, our carbon emissions were about 20% lower than those in 2005. With the new pledge made last November to achieve carbon neutrality before 2050, a Steering Committee personally chaired by me has been working on a new blueprint since the beginning of this year. We are delighted to present the Hong Kong's Climate Action Plan 2050 which sets the vision of 'Zero-carbon Emissions  · Liveable City · Sustainable Development', and commits to a more aggressive medium-term target to reduce total carbon emissions of Hong Kong by half against the 2005 level before 2035.

Over the last decade, we have allocated more than HK$47 billion to various carbon reduction measures. In the next 15 to 20 years, the Government will be investing another HK$240 billion to support a series of actions to combat climate change. Major actions will include developing distributed renewable energy, managing energy demand  including  enhancing  energy  efficiency  and  conservation  in  both  new  and  existing  buildings, decarbonising  the  vehicle  fleet  to  reach  zero  vehicular  emissions,  and  transforming  our  waste  management system to cease landfilling of municipal wastes, etc.

Achieving carbon neutrality in less than 30 years is a tremendous challenge, but it will also open up new opportunities for Hong Kong. The many green initiatives put forward by the Government will create business prospects, nurture local talents and provide employment opportunities. The Government's drive to reduce carbon emissions will also boost investment by the private sector, creating more business and more jobs. They will help Hong  Kong  recover  in  a  green  way  from  the  economic  impact  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic.  As  a  leading international financial centre and innovation and technology hub, Hong Kong will capitalise on the opportunities to develop the city into a leading green financial centre and a new hub for smart and green technology. The Green and Sustainable  Finance  Cross-Agency  Steering  Group,  led  by  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  and  the Securities and Futures Commission, was established last year to accelerate the growth of green and sustainable finance in Hong Kong.

In  addition,  Hong  Kong  aspires  to  integrate  into  the  national  development.  Leveraging  our  position  as  a highly-connected international city, we will be a perfect gateway for foreign businesses to access the Mainland market and for Mainland enterprises to go global, especially to countries along the Belt and Road. Our efforts in decarbonisation as well as our professionals will be able to make a contribution to the global agenda beyond Hong Kong.  For this, we will continue to participate in and work with the international community to combat climate change. We will also partner with our neighbouring cities in the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area to develop this world-class city cluster into an exemplary liveable and sustainable region.

Carrie Lam Chief Executive Hong Kong Special Administrative Region

## Foreword

<!-- image -->

In its report released in August this year, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change of the United Nations issued a global red alert, pointing out clearly that global warming caused by human activities had led to more frequent and intense extreme weather events around the world. To stabilise the global temperature in the next 20 to 30 years, concerted and timely actions are needed worldwide to reduce carbon emissions. To this end, the Chief Executive announced in her 2020 Policy Address that Hong Kong would strive to achieve carbon neutrality before 2050.

Hong  Kong  is  among  the  earliest  cities  in  Asia  taking  actions  to  combat  climate  change.  We  stopped  the construction of new coal-fired power plants in 1997 , and since then have been gradually replacing coal with natural gas and zero-carbon sources for power generation. Due to efforts in the past, our carbon emissions peaked in 2014. To respond to the Paris Agreement, we issued the first Hong Kong's Climate Action Plan 2030+ in 2017 , laying down plans and actions to reduce the carbon intensity by 65-70% by 2030 against the 2005 baseline. In 2020, our carbon emissions were about one-fifth below the baseline of 2005, with a per capita emission of about 4.5 tonnes per year, which had dropped by almost 30% from the peak level of 6.2 tonnes per capita in 2014.

Currently, about 66%, 18% and 7% of Hong Kong's carbon emissions comes from power generation, transport and waste (mainly from landfills) respectively. To achieve carbon neutrality, our three major tasks are to go for net-zero carbon emissions for electricity supply and transport, and to cease landfilling of municipal wastes. This year, we have already published the Waste Blueprint for Hong Kong 2035, the Hong Kong Roadmap on Popularisation of Electric Vehicles and the Clean Air Plan for Hong Kong 2035. They set out the strategies, targets and measures that lay a solid foundation for achieving carbon emissions reduction and other goals.

The Hong Kong's Climate Action Plan 2050 is the fourth major environmental policy plan published this year. It brings together the overall strategies, plans, targets and actions for Hong Kong to achieve carbon neutrality before 2050. In searching for net-zero carbon electricity supply, various zero-carbon energy sources and power generation technologies  are  being  developed  around  the  world.  For  Hong  Kong,  the  safety,  reliability,  affordability  and environmental performance of energy supply are the major considerations. Equally important is reducing energy demand, as it will help lower the costs of achieving carbon neutrality.

The  Hong  Kong's  Climate  Action  Plan  2050  manifests  the  joint  efforts  of  various  government  bureaux  and departments. The strategies and targets intertwine with the financial, economic and technological developments as well as education and capacity building in Hong Kong. Although the implementation of these strategies and targets will be challenging, it will also bring many new opportunities that will not only help Hong Kong become a carbon neutral city, but also support a green recovery of the economy from the effects of COVID-19.

To help the Government develop a new plan to combat climate change, the Council for Sustainable Development conducted a comprehensive bottom-up public engagement exercise. The Council submitted in November 2020 a report on Hong Kong's long-term decarbonisation strategy to the Government with many relevant recommendations and support for Hong Kong to achieve carbon neutrality before 2050. I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to the Council members for their hard work and contribution.

To successfully combat climate change, the whole community must work hand-in-hand. The Government, the private sector and the general public must take proactive actions together. I look forward to working with all parties, including the commercial and industrial sectors, professionals and the youth, as we embark on Hong Kong's deep decarbonisation journey.

## Wong Kam-sing

Secretary for the Environment

## Summary of Hong Kong's Climate Action Plan 2050

<!-- image -->

## Vision    Zero-carbon Emissions • Liveable City • Sustainable Development

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Coastal areas like Heng Fa Chuen were seriously flooded during the passage of Super Typhoon Mangkhut in 2018

<!-- image -->

## Climate Crisis

- 1.1  Climate change affects all regions around the world.  Human activities, in particular burning of fossil fuels (such as coal, natural gas, town gas, etc.), deforestation and animal husbandry,  contribute to the increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration, resulting in a rise in global temperature.
- 1.2  According to the World Meteorological Organisation, 2020 was one of the three warmest years of  the  world.  Global  warming  has  brought about  more  extreme  weather  events  and caused  crisis,  such  as  more  frequent  heat waves,  change  in  precipitation,  rise  in  sea level,  super  typhoons,  rainstorms,  uneven distribution  and  scarcity  of  water resources, and disruption of ecological and environmental balance, etc. The heat waves in North America, as  well  as  the  floods  in  the  Mainland  and various parts of Europe that took place earlier this year, show that serious impacts brought by extreme  weather  conditions  may  happen  in every part of the world.
- 1.3  Like  other  cities,  Hong  Kong  is  facing  problems  such  as  rising  temperatures  and  more extreme  weather  phenomena.  The  scenes  of the damages caused by Super Typhoons Hato in 2017 and Mangkhut in 2018 to Hong Kong are still vivid in our minds. The years of 2019 and 2020 are the two hottest years in Hong Kong on record. In 2021, both the number of very hot days and the number of hot nights in Hong Kong have broken the records.

## Proactive Action without Delay

- 1.4  Climate  experts  have  warned  that  without  a substantial reduction in global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the next 20 to 30 years, it would  be  difficult  to  achieve  the  important climate targets under the Paris Agreement, i.e. limiting  the  global  temperature  rise  to  1.5ºC and  2ºC  in  the  21st  century.  As  a  global citizen, Hong Kong must take timely actions to  tackle  the  carbon  emissions  problem  at source and mitigate the temperature rise to protect ourselves and our future generations.

China will scale up its Intended Nationally Determined Contributions  by  adopting  more  vigorous  policies and measures.  We aim to have CO2 emissions peak before 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality before 2060.

## Extracted from President Xi Jinping's

statement at the General Debate of the 75th Session of the United Nations General Assembly

## Our Country's Targets

- 1.5  In September 2020, President Xi Jinping made it clear that China would endeavour to achieve the peak of carbon emissions before 2030 and carbon  neutrality  before  2060.    These  'dual carbon targets' are an important commitment made  by  our  country  in  combating  climate change.  Being  the  largest  developing  country, China is faced with the challenges of maintaining economic development, improving people's livelihood,  eradicating  poverty,  and  controlling pollution, etc. In these circumstances, achieving carbon peak and carbon neutrality is a huge challenge that requires resolute and vigorous efforts.
- 1.6  The State Council has set up a leading group on carbon peak and carbon neutrality to draw up a timetable and roadmap.  It mainly comprises ten specific areas: (1) optimise energy structure with a  view  to  controlling  and  reducing  the  use  of fossil fuel such as coal; (2) promote the upgrading of production and industries; (3) promote energy-saving  and  low-carbon  buildings  and infrastructure; (4) develop a green and low-carbon transportation system; (5) develop a circular economy to promote the efficient use of resources; (6) promote green and low-carbon technological  innovations;  (7)  develop  green  finance; (8) introduce supporting economic policies and reforms;  (9)  establish  a  sound  carbon  trading market and carbon pricing mechanism; and (10) implement nature-based solutions.

## Hong Kong's Targets

- 1.7 The  Chief  Executive  announced  in  the  2020 Policy Address that Hong Kong would strive to achieve  carbon  neutrality  before  2050.  In 2019,  electricity  generation  was  the  largest source  of  carbon  emissions,  accounting  for about two-thirds (66%) of the total emissions in Hong Kong, followed by transport (about 18%), waste (about 7%, mainly from landfills), other end  use  of  fuel  (about  5%),  and  industrial processes and product use (about 4%). It is an extremely challenging target to achieve carbon neutrality  before  2050,  i.e.  in  less  than  30 years. Hong Kong must formulate a proactive, forward-looking  and  targeted  decarbonisation strategy, and strive to encourage the participation of the whole community.

The  community  in  general  expects  Hong Kong  to  go  further  in  deep  decarbonisation… The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region will strive to achieve carbon neutrality before  2050.  To  this  end,  the  Government will  set  out  more  proactive  strategies  and measures to reduce carbon emissions.

The Chief Executive, Mrs Carrie Lam, announced Hong Kong's carbon neutrality target in the 2020 Policy Address

## Targets of achieving carbon neutrality set by cities

<!-- image -->

2025

<!-- image -->

2030

<!-- image -->

Before 2050

## Strategies and Actions

- 1.8  Our top priority is to make careful planning so that Hong Kong can use zero-carbon energy for electricity  generation  extensively  and  achieve carbon neutrality before 2050. Not only will this address about two-thirds of the current carbon emissions in Hong Kong, it will also provide zero-carbon energy to an electrified transport system. In addition, if the waste-to-energy facilities required  for  replacing  the  development  of  new landfills are in place, we can reduce about 90% of our carbon emission. As for the remaining carbon emissions of less than 10%, they would be dealt with through the development and application of low-carbon technologies.
- 1.9  The  low-carbon  transformation  of  electricity generation in Hong Kong requires an enormous amount of financial resources. To lower the cost and minimise the financial burden, we must lay down clear strategies and specific action plans to reduce the demand for energy. For instance, we must set more stringent energy efficiency standards,  enhance  the  energy  efficiency  of both new and existing buildings, and enlist the full support of various sectors in the society to save energy and reduce waste.

## Challenges and Opportunities

- 1.10It is beyond doubt that achieving carbon neutrality before  2050  poses  great  challenges  to  Hong Kong.  However,  vigorous  low-carbon  transformation will bring many economic and social development opportunities, including a thriving and diversified green economy, green finance, green planning and innovation and technology (I&amp;T), as well as abundant opportunities for regional cooperation and enhancing Hong Kong's strength as an international city, thereby creating  golden  career  prospects  for  our  younger generations.

New York Tokyo Seoul

2050

<!-- image -->

After 2050

<!-- image -->

## What is carbon neutrality?

Carbon neutrality refers to achieving relative 'zero-carbon emissions' in a place or by an organisation, etc. over a certain period of time. This  can  be  done  by  replacing  conventional fossil energy, conserving energy, green commuting, 'use less, waste less', planting, afforestation,  purchasing  renewable  energy (RE) certificates and carbon trading, etc. to reduce or offset the carbon emissions generated from the activities of the place or the organisation. Achieving carbon neutrality helps limit the rise in carbon concentration and global temperature, and reduce the risks and damages caused by climate change.

<!-- image -->

## Chapter 2 PAST ACHIEVEMENTS IN DECARBONISATION

HONG KONG'S

Climate

## Moving Steadily Towards Decarbonisation Targets

- 2.1  In  January  2017 ,  we  announced  the  Hong Kong's Climate Action Plan 2030+, setting out the target of reducing carbon intensity by 65% to 70% by 2030 using 2005 as the base, which is equivalent to a reduction in Hong Kong's total carbon  emissions  by  26%  to  36%  from  the 2005 level by 2030.
- 2.2  We are moving steadily towards our decarbonisation  target.  Hong  Kong's  total carbon  emissions  have  shown  a  downward trend  after  reaching  its  peak  in  2014  (i.e. carbon emissions will decline after reaching the peak and will not rise again), with the per capita carbon emissions reduced from 6.2 tonnes in 2014  to  5.3  tonnes  in  2019.    The  power companies have gradually replaced coal with natural  gas  in  electricity  generation.  Based on  preliminary  estimation,  the  per  capita carbon emissions in 2020 would be reduced to around 4.5 tonnes.
- 2.3  Energy, transport and waste account for more than 90% of Hong Kong's total carbon emissions.  The progress of our work on decarbonisation on these fronts are summarised as follows.

<!-- image -->

Hong Kong has been implementing the Hong Kong's Climate Action Plan 2030+ published in 2017

<!-- image -->

January 2017

New gas-fired generation unit at Black Point Power Station

<!-- image -->

## Development of Renewable Energy

- 2.6  The  Government  introduced  the  Feed-in Tariff (FiT)  Scheme  with  the  power  companies  in 2018, in which the power companies purchase RE  generated  by  the  private  sector  at  a  rate higher than the electricity tariff.  The Government  has  also  rolled  out  the  Solar  Harvest Scheme  under  which  solar  energy  generation systems  are  installed  at  schools  and  social welfare organisations for free.
- 2.7  The Government has taken the lead in developing  RE,  and  a  number  of  waste-to-energy projects  have  been  launched  progressively  or are under planning. We are also actively developing larger-scale RE projects in suitable reservoirs,  sewage  treatment  and  flood  prevention facilities, as well as restored landfills.  Besides, the  Government  has  earmarked  a  total  of $3 billion to install small-scale RE systems at government  premises  since  2017-18.    About 130 projects have been approved so far, including installation of solar energy generation systems  at  government  offices,  government quarters, schools, recreational grounds-cum-rest gardens, reservoirs and pedestrian links, as well as installation of waste-to-energy and hydro power systems at multiple sewage treatment plants.  The projects are expected to generate a total of about 21 million kWh of electricity annually and reduce about 15 000 tonnes of carbon emissions.
- 2.8  With  the  implementation  of  the  above-mentioned  measures  to  develop  RE  in  the  public and the private sectors, around 300 million kWh of electricity can be generated each year which is  sufficient  for  use  by  90  000  households annually. A total of about 210 000 tonnes of carbon emissions can be reduced (i.e. 0.5% of Hong Kong's total carbon emissions).

## Fuel Mix

- 2.4  Electricity generation is the largest contributor to carbon emissions in Hong Kong, accounting for 66% of the total carbon emissions in 2019. Hong Kong has been relying on imported fuel for electricity generation or imported electricity from  the  Mainland  to  meet  its  electricity demand.

## Reduce the use of coal

- 2.5  Among the fuels in Hong Kong's fuel mix, coal has  the  highest  carbon  emissions.  The  two power companies have gradually replaced coal with  natural  gas  from  2015  to  2020  as required by the Government.  The share of coal in the fuel mix has been reduced from around half to less than a quarter, while the share of natural  gas  has  significantly  increased  from around a quarter to almost half. As a result, carbon  emissions  were  reduced  by  around 7.3 million tonnes (about 18% of Hong Kong's total carbon emissions) within f  ive years.

## Hong Kong's Fuel Mix for Electricity Generation

<!-- image -->

nt e-

ne

1S

or n-

er le

er le

a-

C-

1S

The pilot schemes to install floating solar energy generation systems at Shek Pik

Engaging the community in

Reservoir and Plover Cove Reservoir were

RE development completed in 2017. The two 100 kW power

generation systems can each generate up to

120 000 kWh of electricity annually, which electricity

Is equivalent to the annual consumption of 36 households. A total of 84

tonnes of carbon emissions can be reduced

## FiT Scheme

The  FiT  Scheme  is  one  of  the  important initiatives to promote the development of RE under the current Scheme of Control Agreements.  Under  the  Scheme,  members  of  the public and  non-governmental organisations who have installed solar photovoltaic  (PV)  or wind energy generation systems at their premises  can sell  the  RE  generated to the power companies at a rate higher than the electricity tariff. The FiT Scheme is well received by the public.  The two power companies received a total of over 16 000 applications from October 2018 to June 2021, of which over 14 000 have been approved. Upon completion of the installation of all approved solar energy generation systems, about 200  million  kWh  of electricity  is  estimated  to  be  generated  each year, which is sufficient to meet the electricity demand of about 67 000 households, reducing about 140 000 tonnes of carbon emissions each year (i.e. about 0.4% of Hong Kong's total carbon emissions).

## Floating solar energy generation systems

The  pilot  schemes  to  install  floating  solar energy generation systems at Shek  Pik Reservoir  and  Plover  Cove  Reservoir  were completed in 2017. The two 100 kW power generation systems can each generate up to 120 000 kWh of electricity annually, which is equivalent to the annual electricity consumption of 36 households. A total of 84 tonnes of carbon emissions can be reduced each year. Floating solar  energy  generation facilities can also protect our water resources, reduce water evaporation and control the growth of algae.

SULAR HARVEST

Under the Solar Harvest Scheme, the Electrical and

## Engaging the community in RE development

After  the  launch  of  the  FiT  Scheme,  solar  energy generation systems have been installed on the rooftops of many residential units

<!-- image -->

The Kowloon Motor Bus Company (1933) Limited and Long Win Bus Company Limited have installed solar panels on bus shelters to supply electricity for lighting at bus stops

<!-- image -->

## Solar Harvest

Under the Solar Harvest Scheme, the Electrical and Mechanical Services Department (EMSD) installs solar energy  generation  systems  for  schools  and  social welfare organisations for free. Students can learn about carbon reduction from first-hand experience of the RE systems at their schools

<!-- image -->

The floating solar energy generation system at Plover Cove Reservoir.  The cool and open environment of the reservoir can enhance the efficiency of the solar energy generation system in electricity generation by around 20% as compared with those normally installed on roofs or ground

<!-- image -->

growth of algae.

bus stops solar Harvest

ncy Ordinance e Mandatory

Iling Scheme

I to the aving targets

system

Total due to rounding

1 500 (72.3%)

450 (21.7%)

115 (5.5%)

9 (0.4%)

2 074

## Energy Saving

- 2.9  Buildings  account  for  about  90%  of  Hong Kong's total electricity  consumption, and over 60% of our carbon emissions is attributable to generating  electricity  for  our  buildings.  The Government is committed to managing electricity  demand  and  promoting  energy  conservation. With the implementation of various energy saving measures, it is estimated that about 2.1 billion kWh of electricity was conserved in 2020 as  compared  with  2015  (-4.7%),  and  about 1.45 million tonnes of carbon emissions were reduced (i.e.  about 3.6% of Hong Kong's total carbon emissions).

Electricity conserved from implementing energy saving measures (2020 as compared with 2015) PLATINUM

BEAM PlUS

dly and energy-efficient

| Energy saving measures                                               | Electricity conserved (million kWh)                |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| Measures related to the Buildings Energy Efficiency Ordinance        | 1 500 (72.3%)                                      |
| Measures related to the Mandatory Energy Efficiency Labelling Scheme | 450 (21.7%)                                        |
| Measures related to the Government's energy saving targets           | 115 (5.5%)                                         |
| District cooling system                                              | 9 (0.4%)                                           |
| Total                                                                | 2 074 (i.e. around 2.1 billion kWh of electricity) |

## Energy saving in government buildings

- 2.10  The Government led by example and achieved the five-year (i.e. 2015-16 to 2019-20) target of reducing electricity consumption in government buildings by 5% in 2018-19, one year ahead  of  schedule,  with  a  final  electricity saving of about 7 .8%. Over 110 million kWh of electricity was conserved in 2020 as compared with 2015, and about 77 000 tonnes of carbon emissions were reduced (i.e. about 0.2% of Hong Kong's total carbon emissions). As  of  2020,  a  total  of  41  new  government buildings  constructed  by  the  Architectural Services Department (ArchSD) have attained Gold rating or above under the BEAM Plus, 14 of which have even reached Platinum rating, accounting  for 13%  of  all  projects rated Platinum in Hong Kong.  The new government buildings  built  by  ArchSD  have  saved  about 370 million kWh of electricity in total, which is sufficient for consumption by 110 000 households every year.

Note: Do not add up to 100% due to rounding

<!-- image -->

The  Hong  Kong  Children's  Hospital  has  incorporated  a number  of  environmentally-friendly  and  energy-efficient installations, and has achieved Platinum rating under BEAM Plus New Buildings Version 1.2.  The cover of this blueprint is the RE installation of the Hong Kong Children's Hospital

<!-- image -->

sufficient for consumption by 110 000 house- holds every year.

West Kowloon Cultural District has achieved Platinum rating under BEAM Plus Neighbourhood Version 1.0

<!-- image -->

## Advancing towards net zero buildings

Industry participation is important in promoting and improving Hong Kong's sustainable  built  environment.  The  Hong Kong Green Building Council Limited (HKGBC), a certification body for the building assessment tool BEAM  Plus, promotes green  buildings  with  the  aim  to  'advance

## Energy saving in private buildings

- 2.11  Since  the  implementation  of  the  Buildings Energy  Efficiency  Ordinance  (Cap.  610)  in 2012  that regulates the energy efficiency standards of four key types of building services installations (i.e. air-conditioning, lighting, electrical installations, lifts and escalators, etc.) in various types of buildings, the Government has  reviewed  the  standards  once  every  three years.  With  the  implementation  of  the  above ordinance, it is expected that all regulated new and  existing  buildings  in  Hong  Kong  can conserve about 1.5 billion kWh of electricity in 2020 (as compared with 2015), with around 1.05 million tonnes of carbon emissions reduced (i.e. about 2.6% of Hong Kong's total carbon emissions).

towards net zero'.  The HKGBC is discussing with  the  Government  the  development  of  a sustainability assessment system for infrastructure  projects,  and  is  preparing  a guidebook on urban sustainable built environment to be used as a basis for the building assessment of green finance.

## Energy Efficiency Labelling Scheme

- 2.12  The Government has implemented the Mandatory Energy Efficiency Labelling Scheme (MEELS) since  2009,  which  currently  covers  eight types  of electrical  products  including  room air-conditioners  and  televisions.  These  electrical appliances account for about 50% of the total energy  consumption  in  the  residential  sector. The MEELS can save about 930 million kWh of electricity each year and reduce about 650 000 tonnes of carbon emissions (i.e. about 1.6% of Hong Kong's total carbon emissions). Our latest proposal is to expand the scope of the MEELS  to  include  three  types  of  products, namely  light  emitting  diode  (LED)  lamps,  gas cookers and gas instantaneous water heaters.  It is estimated that an additional 568.8 terajoules of energy (i.e. about 160 million kWh of electricity) can be saved each year and about 75 000 tonnes of carbon emissions (i.e. about 0.2% of Hong Kong's total carbon emissions) can be reduced. By then, household appliances covered by the MEELS will account for about 80% of the total energy consumption in the residential sector, a big jump from about 50%.

<!-- image -->

Partnersnip isations. It is

• schemes

DEEPENING

Planning

Stage !

ENERGY SAVING IN

EXISTING BUILDINGS

ectricity kWh

IN HONG KONG

THROUGH '4TS' PARTNERSHIP

On-going

Commissioning

RCX

Implementation

ENERGY SMART

## Promoting retro-commissioning in the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area

Retro-commissioning (RCx) is to timely check the energy performance of an existing building to identify energy saving potentials for operational improvement. Through tuning and adjusting building services systems and equipment, optimal operation efficiency  can  be  achieved,  thus  saving energy and reducing carbon emissions. In 2018,  EMSD  signed  a  memorandum  of cooperation with the engineering institutions and universities in Guangdong, Macao, Beijing and Shanghai to enhance experience sharing  by  holding  regular  meetings  and co-organising  academic  forums  as  well  as training courses, and to jointly promote RCx and develop energy-efficient buildings. The Government is pressing ahead with the promotion of RCx in the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area (GBA) to further enhance the driving force for green development in the region.

Four stages of RCx: planning, investigation, implementation and ongoing commissioning

<!-- image -->

## District cooling system

- 2.13 District cooling system (DCS) can save up to 35% of electricity consumption when compared with conventional central air-conditioning system in individual buildings.  It is estimated that since commissioning in 2013 and up till 2019-20, the DCS at Kai Tak Development has saved a total of over 20 million kWh of electricity, which is equivalent to a reduction of about 14 000 tonnes of carbon emissions (i.e. about  0.03%  of  Hong  Kong's  total  carbon emissions). Our DCS has won many local and international  awards.    For  example,  it  was selected by Cities 100, a C40 publication, as one of the action plans that could proactively combat climate change in 2019.

Ice les

of tal

ореб sanui

## '4T' Partnership

With a view to assisting  various sectors to reduce electricity consumption of buildings, the Environment Bureau (ENB) has developed a concise '4T' framework. Under this frame-

<!-- image -->

work, a carbon reduction 'Target' with a 'Timeline' should be set, the efforts made should be shown with appropriate metrics to ensure 'Transparency', and everyone should work 'Together' towards the target. So  far,  we  have  about  60  major  '4T' partners who are developers, public utilities, financial institutions and professional organisations, etc.

In addition to energy saving, we are further encouraging them to set targets and timelines  for  the  development  of  RE,  the adoption  of  green  transport,  and  waste reduction, etc.,  and  share  their  measures as well as their achievements. In our bid to strive towards the goal of carbon neutrality, we  will  upgrade  the  '4T'  Partnership  to 'Carbon Neutrality' Partnership.

## Support for energy saving and carbon emissions reduction in various sectors

<!-- image -->

- 2.14   The  Government  has  introduced  the  Green Schools 2.0 - Energy Smart  scheme  and the Green Welfare NGOs scheme to conduct energy audits and install energy-saving devices, etc. for primary and secondary schools and premises of social welfare organisations. It is estimated  that  the  schemes will achieve an electricity saving of 45 million kWh annually, and reduce around 32 000 tonnes of carbon emissions (i.e. about 0.1% of Hong Kong's total carbon emissions).

## Green Transport

- 2.15    T ransport is the second largest source of carbon emissions in Hong Kong, accounting for about 18% of Hong Kong's total carbon emissions in 2019. Despite population and economic growth, carbon emissions from transport have maintained at a relatively stable level in the past few  years.  Hong  Kong  has  a  well-developed public  transport  system  with  railway  as  the backbone.  About 90% of daily passenger trips are made by public transport, therefore the per capita  transport-related  carbon  emissions  in Hong Kong are relatively low compared to other major cities.

## Popularisation of electric vehicles (EVs)

- 2.16    In recent years, the Government has been focusing  on  promoting  new  energy  vehicles  and vessels, as well as establishing ancillary facilities to accelerate the development of green transport in pursuit  of  zero-carbon  transportation. Currently, the number of registered vehicles in Hong Kong has  reached  920  000,  of  which  private  cars (PCs)  account  for  more  than  70%  (about 660 000 vehicles). Their total carbon emissions are  the  highest  among  all  types  of  vehicles, taking  up  one-fourth  of  the  carbon  emissions generated by the transport sector.  Promoting the use of electric private cars (e-PCs) can help expedite decarbonisation.
- 2.17   The  Government  has  been  waiving  the  first registration  tax  (FRT)  on  electric  commercial vehicles in full, and has introduced the 'One-for-One Replacement' Scheme to provide higher  FRT  concessions  to  car  owners  who replace their old PCs with EVs. Vehicle licence fees for e-PCs are relatively low. The number of registered  e-PCs  has  increased  significantly from  60  in  end-2010  to  around  21  000  in mid-2021, making up over 3% of the existing PCs in Hong Kong.  In the first half of 2021, one out of every five newly registered PCs is an e-PC.

<!-- image -->

## Carbon emissions of vehicles in Hong Kong in 2019

% of Hong Kong's total carbon emissions

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Popularisation of EV charging in new buildings

## EV-charging at Home Subsidy Scheme (EHSS)

project Grand Central

To enhance the EV charging network in Hong Kong and facilitate the switch to EVs by members of the public, the Environmental Protection Department (EPD) launched the $2 billion EHSS  in  October  2020  to  subsidise  the installation of EV charging-enabling infrastructure  in  the  car  parks  of  existing private residential buildings. It is expected to benefit more than 60 000 parking spaces. The Scheme is well received, with over 490 applications  received  as  of  mid-September 2021, involving more than 105 000 parking spaces.

Popularisation of EV charging in new buildings

<!-- image -->

EV  charging  facilities  at  the  car  park  of  the  residential project Grand Central

<!-- image -->

study is to regulate traffic flow and alleviate traffic congestion through appropriate adjustment

of tolls, thereby reducing the emissions caused by traffic congestion during peak hours.

## New energy transport

2.18 The  New  Energy  Transport  Fund  (NET  Fund) subsidises the transport sector to try out and apply green transport technologies. As of end-June 2021, the NET Fund had approved nearly  150  projects  on  electric  commercial vehicles, over 70 projects on hybrid commercial vehicles and 8 projects on technologies upgrading conventional buses or ferries.

2.19 The  NET  Fund  has  granted  subsidies  to  two franchised bus companies to purchase double-deck  electric  buses,  and  the  trials  of these electric buses are expected to commence progressively  within  two  years.  Moreover,  the Government has earmarked $80 million for a pilot  scheme  for  electric  public  light  buses which is expected to commence in 2023; and is in parallel exploring the implementation of a trial scheme of  electric  taxis  to  subsidise  the  taxi trade to test the operation and business mode.

## Traffic management

2.20  The Transport Department (TD) is undertaking a study on 'congestion charging' to comprehensively  review  the  toll  levels  of  all government tolled tunnels. The objective of the study  is  to  regulate  traffic  flow  and  alleviate traffic congestion through appropriate adjustment of tolls, thereby reducing the emissions caused by traffic congestion during peak hours.

Traffic condition during peak hours in Wan Chai

<!-- image -->

## Railway development

2.21  Our railway system serves as the backbone of low-carbon  transport  in  Hong  Kong.  The Transport and Housing Bureau has invited MTR Corporation  Limited  (MTRCL)  to  work  on  the detailed  planning  and  design  for  the  Tung Chung  Line  Extension,  the  Tuen  Mun  South Extension,  the  Northern  Link  and  the  Hung Shui Kiu Station to facilitate the use of public transport.

public to practise waste reduction and recycling. The Government has already

commenced the preparatory work for the implementation of MSW charging.

Recycling stores and recycling spots

Recycling Stores have commenced service gradually since November 2020. It adopts

## Waste Reduction and Recycling

- 2.22 Waste  was  the  third  largest  source  of  Hong Kong's  total  carbon  emissions  in  2019.    It accounted  for  about  7%  of  the  total  carbon emissions, and over 90% of such emissions came from decomposition of waste in landfills. The Government has been reducing the carbon emissions from waste through the promotion of waste reduction and recycling, and the development of waste-to-energy facilities.

## Municipal solid waste charging

Paper

Recycling Spot

- 2.23 The  Legislative  Council  (LegCo)  passed  the bill on municipal solid waste (MSW) charging in  August  2021.  MSW charging will be the main driving force for various sectors and the public to practise waste reduction and recycling. The Government has already commenced  the  preparatory  work  for  the implementation of MSW charging.

## Recycling stores and recycling spots

•**

Recycling  Stores  have  commenced  service gradually since November 2020.  It adopts the number '6' as the logo, a homophone for the word 'green' in Cantonese, symbolising circulation of resources in an endless cycle. Currently,  there  are  dozens  of  Recycling Stores  and  over  100  Recycling  Spots  that operate regularly  at  designated  locations  in all  districts  across  the  territory.  They  have attracted hundreds of thousands of people to visit and participate in clean recycling every month,  and  collect  plastics,  waste  paper, metals, glass bottles, small electrical appliances, regulated electrical equipment, compact fluorescent  lamps/fluorescent light tubes and rechargeable batteries for recycling.

## Expansion of community recycling network

- 2.24 The Government has been vigorously expanding its community recycling network in recent years  to  encourage  the  recovery  of  low-value recyclable wastes, thereby relieving the burden on  landfills.  To  support  smart  city  development,  EPD  launched  a  Pilot  Programme  on Smart Recycling Systems in September 2020 to test in phases the local application of smart recycling  facilities  connected  by  Internet  of Things (IoT) technology.  The Government also plays  a  proactive  role  by  intervening  in  the market in an appropriate and timely manner, providing  for  the  central  collection  of  glass bottles, paper, plastics, and food waste, etc.

Reverse Vending Machine Pilot Scheme

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Recycling Spot

Recycling Store

<!-- image -->

Recycling Store

2 19 1

5 To gradually move away from reliance on landfilling for direct waste disposal, waste

management infrastructure which turns waste into energy has progressively come into operation

over the past few years, including T• PARK

with a treatment capacity of 2 000 tonnes of sludge per day, as well as O • PARK 1 (Organic

Resources Recovery Centre Phase 1) with a treatment capacity of 200 tonnes of food

## Waste-to-energy

2.25 To  gradually  move  away  from  reliance  on landfilling  for  direct  waste  disposal,  waste management infrastructure which turns waste into energy has progressively come into operation over  the  past  few  years,  including  T· PARK with a treatment capacity of 2 000 tonnes of sludge per day, as well as O · PARK 1 (Organic Resources Recovery Centre Phase 1) with a treatment  capacity  of  200  tonnes  of  food waste per day. More waste-to-energy facilities are  under  construction  and  planning.  The construction  works  for  O · PARK  2  (Organic Resources  Recovery  Centre  Phase  2)  have commenced  and  the  facility  is  expected  to come into operation in 2023. I · PARK (Integrated Waste Management Facilities Phase 1) will also commence operation in 2025.

0• PARK 2

Organic Resources

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Recovery Centre Phase 2

Under construction

1E555

Artist's Impression

T•PARK

<!-- image -->

O·PARK 1 Organic Resources Recovery Centre Phase 1 Commenced operation in 2018

<!-- image -->

Y·PARK Commenced operation in 2021

T• PARK

Commenced operation in 2015

Chapter 3

CHALLENGES

electricity tariffs.

## Cost of Decarbonisation

- 3.1  More and more countries and cities have set their  targets  for  achieving  carbon  neutrality and allocated substantial resources for implementing decarbonisation measures. Hong Kong should take action, too. Both the Government  and  the  private  sector  have  to  devote resources to further promote decarbonisation in electricity generation, transport, and waste management,  etc. We  all have a shared responsibility to reduce carbon emissions.
- 3.2  Decarbonisation comes at a price.  Take electricity generation as an example.  Hong Kong has relatively limited potential for developing large-scale RE (such as solar and wind energy) due  to  its  geographical  factors,  scarce  land resources and dense population.  To promote net-zero  electricity  generation  in  Hong  Kong, we have to explore different options, including regional  cooperation,  investing  abroad,  joint development  or  import  of  low-carbon  and zero-carbon energy.  In this connection, it is unavoidable that Hong Kong will need to invest a  substantial  amount  of  capital  to  build  the infrastructure required for the production, reception and storage of zero-carbon energy, which will inevitably  put  upward  pressure  on electricity tariffs. cost of decarbonisation
- 3.3  As new technologies become  increasingly mature and advanced, the cost of decarbonisation measures is expected to go down gradually.  Take electricity generation as an example. According to a study published by the International Renewable Energy Agency in 2021, the generation cost of utility-scale solar PV systems had fallen by more than 80% over the past decade. As countries around the world are ramping up their  investments  in  the  development  of  RE and upgrading the technologies for low-carbon electricity generation, the cost of RE is expected  to  reduce  further,  and  the  stability  of electricity supply will be further enhanced.
- 3.4  To lower the cost of decarbonisation, we must reduce  Hong  Kong's  carbon  footprint.  Members of the public should seriously change their lifestyle and consumption pattern by, for example,  saving  energy,  using  public  transport, avoiding  buying  unnecessary  products,  and supporting  waste  reduction  at  source  and clean recycling as far as possible.

Through actions such as energy saving for all, green mobility and waste reduction, we can reduce Hong Kong's carbon footprint to lower the cost of decarbonisation

<!-- image -->

## Space Constraint

- 3.5  The development of decarbonisation infrastructure  requires  the  support  of  land  and  space. With its hilly terrain and limited sea area, Hong Kong faces various constraints on the development of large-scale RE. In addition, it would be more difficult to install charging and re-fuelling facilities for new energy vehicles in a densely populated  city  like  Hong  Kong.  As  for  waste management,  we  need  land  for  constructing adequate waste-to-energy and waste-to-resources facilities so that Hong Kong can move away from over-reliance on landfills.  We need the support of the whole community to allocate land resources and identify suitable locations for developing green infrastructure.

## Extreme Weather

- 3.6  Like other coastal cities, Hong Kong is prone to the impacts of climate change. The mean sea level in Victoria Harbour went up at a rate of 31 mm  per  decade  from  1954  to  2020  on average.    Over  the  past  century  or  so,  the number  of  very hot days  in  Hong  Kong increased  by  more  than  7  times,  and  the number of hot nights increased by more than 38 times. We are facing more severe tropical cyclone  threats  caused  by  extreme  weather. For  instance,  the  storm  surge  induced  by Super  Typhoon  Mangkhut  wreaked  havoc  in 2018.    We  have  to  put  in  extra  efforts  to combat extreme weather.

A densely populated city like Hong Kong faces different constraints on the development of decarbonisation infrastructure. Like other coastal cities, Hong Kong has to cope with the impacts of extreme weather caused by climate change

<!-- image -->

green transformation.

E&amp;M InnoPortal®

Environment Bureau nviron

al Protection Depart

Green

Tech Fund

## Technology Breakthrough

sponsored enterprises to provide green job opportunities for young people

- 3.7  The  pace  of  advancement  in  decarbonisation technologies around the world is one of the key factors in our pursuit of carbon neutrality before 2050. At present, many decarbonisation technologies are still at the development stage and are not ready for wide application in Hong Kong  in  the  near  future.  For  instance,  green hydrogen has developed rapidly in recent years, and is expected to facilitate the green transformation of energy for electricity generation and transport. However, before it is ready for large-scale application, further studies are  required  on  ways  to  reduce  the  cost  of production and transportation of green hydrogen, and  minimise  energy  loss  in  the  production process. The technologies on storage devices, such as storage batteries, that are critical to the application of RE requires further improvement. In addition, development and application of smart management systems, making use of big data and artificial intelligence, can help reduce energy consumption and carbon emissions associated with buildings.
- 3.8  The vigorous promotion of low-carbon transformation by the governments of various countries has stimulated the development and commercial application of green technologies. Hong Kong must expedite the development of I&amp;T,  nurture  talents  in  technological  research and provide them with support, and encourage enterprises to try out and apply decarbonisation technologies and projects.

## E&amp;M InnoPortal

## Demand for Talents

- 3.9 The  development  of  green  economy  will create new industries and job opportunities. Researchers,  business  management  talent and technicians with the relevant knowledge and skills are required to meet the manpower needs  of different industries during the green transformation.

ENB  has  created  jobs  related  to  environmental  protection  and sponsored enterprises to provide green job opportunities for young people

<!-- image -->

## Participation for All

- 3.10 Achieving carbon neutrality before 2050 requires  the  participation  and  support  of  the whole community. The Government, business sectors, schools and non-governmental organisations must work together and set an example by  promoting  and  encouraging  the  public  to adopt and practise a low-carbon lifestyle.

## Green Tech Fund

In June 2018, EMSD launched the E&amp;M InnoPortal for matching the I&amp;T solutions developed by start-ups and academic institutions with the service needs of government  departments,  public  organisations  and  the electrical and mechanical trades, covering energy conservation and use of RE.  Start-ups and academic institutions, etc. can make use of the online platform to propose  I&amp;T  solutions  for  matching,  with  a  view  to promoting the commercialisation of their research and development  (R&amp;D)  results.    EMSD  would  provide government venues for suitable projects, take forward trials  and  pilot  projects  through  collaboration,  and upload the validated performance reports of trial cases onto the platform for sharing with the public, so as to jointly facilitate and promote the R&amp;D and the application of I&amp;T. The E&amp;M InnoPortal has so far gathered over 360 service needs and over 800 solutions.

<!-- image -->

The  $200  million  Green  Tech Fund  was  set  up  by  EPD  in December 2020 to provide funding support for R&amp;D projects which can promote decarbonisation and environmental protection in Hong Kong.  As of early October 2021, 8 projects have been approved  in  the  first  round  of applications, involving a total grant of around $39 million.

<!-- image -->

Chapter 4

## DECARBONISATION STRATEGIES · TARGETS · ACTIONS

<!-- image -->

24

## Overall Strategies

- 4.1. 1  The  Hong  Kong  economy  is  predominately supported  by  the  tertiary  industry  without major  energy-intensive  industries.  In  2019, electricity generation was the largest source of carbon emissions (66%), followed by transport (18%)  and  waste  (7%).  These  three  major emission sources together accounted for over 90% of the total emissions, and are therefore the three most critical areas of our decarbonisation work.
- 4.1.2  Currently, the local fuel mix for electricity generation mainly relies on fossil fuels such as coal and natural gas. We can remove most of the carbon emissions if we increase the use of zero-carbon energy  for  electricity  generation  and  gradually phase out fossil fuel vehicles by electrifying the transport  sector.  For  carbon  emissions  from waste, they are mainly GHGs generated by the decomposition of municipal waste in landfills. As such, we will have to break away entirely from landfilling for municipal waste disposal in order to reduce carbon emissions and avoid utilising our precious land for developing new landfills. As for the remaining carbon emission sources, such as non-road  vehicles  and  refrigerants,  we  have  to identify suitable zero-carbon energy or alternative technologies.
- 4.1.3  Increasing the use of zero-carbon energy requires the support of technologies as well as finance and land resources. On the other hand, reducing  the  energy  demand  can  lower  the total  cost  of  switching  to  zero-carbon  energy and lessen the financial burden on the public. At present, buildings account for about 90% of the electricity consumption in Hong Kong. As such, improving energy efficiency of buildings to  reduce  the  energy  demand will be our top priority in future energy saving efforts.
- 4.1.4  Based on the above analysis, the strategies for Hong Kong to achieve carbon neutrality before 2050  should  comprise:  'net-zero  electricity generation',  'energy  saving  and  green  buildings', 'green transport' and 'waste reduction'.

## Medium-term Decarbonisation Targets

- 4.2. 1  Between  now  and  2050,  different  technologies  and  zero-carbon  energy  that  can  help achieve carbon neutrality are being developed around the world. Examples include the application and storage technologies of various RE,

<!-- image -->

blue  and  green  hydrogen  energy,  ammonia nitrogen, carbon capture and storage, carbon-neutral natural gas, and various carbon sinks, etc. It is uncertain which of the technologies  will  eventually  be  developed  into  more mature, reliable and cost-effective ones suitable  for  large-scale  application  in  Hong Kong. To press ahead with deep decarbonisation for the purpose of proactively mitigating climate change, we need to set a more ambitious medium-term target. Adopting the prevailing technologies that are relatively mature and cost-effective, we aim to reduce the total carbon emissions by half before 2035 from the 2005 level, i.e. from about 40 million tonnes in 2005 to nearly 20 million tonnes in 2035.

- 4.2.2 In the meantime, we need to prepare for the development and trials of various technologies and solutions that may be suitable for Hong Kong in future,  with a view to achieving carbon neutrality before 2050 through the adoption of mature, reliable and cost-effective solutions in a timely manner.

## Hong Kong's Roadmap to Carbon Neutrality

<!-- image -->

Hong Kong's strategies on decarbonisation and climate change adaptation.

COUNCIL FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

Report on Public Engagement on

Long-term Decarbonisation Strategy

November 2020

## Report on Long-term Decarbonisation Strategy

<!-- image -->

At the invitation of the Government, the Council for Sustainable  Development(SDC)  launched a territory-wide public engagement exercise on the long-term decarbonisation strategy of Hong Kong by adopting a bottom-up and stakeholder-oriented approach,  so  as  to enhance  public  awareness  of  the  impact  of carbon  emissions  and  gauge  the  views  of  the community.

In November 2020, SDC submitted a report to the Government,  identifying  six  overarching  objectives for Hong Kong's decarbonisation strategy, namely driving societal change towards low-carbon lifestyles; accelerating the shift to zero-carbon energy; promoting a sustainable built environment; promoting  transitions  towards  low-carbon transport systems; unlocking green and sustainable  finance  potential  for  low-carbon transition;  and  steering  innovations  in  climate change  mitigation,  adaptation  and  resilience. SDC's  report  provides  important  reference  for Hong Kong's strategies on decarbonisation and climate change adaptation.

The  Council  for  Sustainable  Development  published  the Report on Public Engagement on Long-term Decarbonisation Strategy in November 2020

<!-- image -->

## Net-zero Electricity Generation

## Long-term target : Net-zero carbon emissions in electricity generation before 2050

4.3. 1  At  present,  fossil  fuels,  including  natural  gas and coal, account for over 70% of Hong Kong's fuel mix for electricity generation.  Under the overall strategy of achieving carbon neutrality, we  must  progressively  increase  the  use  of zero-carbon  energy  for  electricity  generation before 2050. In searching for suitable zero-carbon energy, four important factors should be taken into account : safety, reliability, affordability and environmental performance.

<!-- image -->

Safety

<!-- image -->

Environmental performance

Reliability

<!-- image -->

Affordability

<!-- image -->

4.3.2 Due to limitations of land and natural resources, many major cities in the world are unable to completely  rely  on  zero-carbon  electricity generated  locally.    For  example,  in  many European cities,  the  plans  to  achieve  carbon neutrality in electricity generation focus on the following  three  areas:  replacing  the  existing fossil fuels progressively with new zero-carbon energy  for  electricity  generation,  striving  to develop RE such as solar energy, and importing zero-carbon electricity from surrounding areas. We can also follow this  direction  in  reducing carbon emissions from the electricity generation sector.

4.3.3 On  RE  development,  we  can  increase  RE supply through government-developed facilities,  investment  by  power  companies  and encouraging public participation.  Our goal is to increase the share of RE in the fuel mix for electricity  generation  from  the  existing  less than 1% to 15% before 2050.  Specifically, the  Government  can  strive  to  develop  more advanced  waste-to-energy  facilities  to  turn waste into electricity.  Moreover, in view of the limited  land-based  RE  resources,  we  may explore the use of space and potential on the sea to build wind farms.  The Government will also continue to take the lead in RE development and create favourable conditions for the private sector to do so.

- 4.3.4 As RE such as solar and wind energy is intermittent by nature, using RE as the main source for electricity generation has its shortcomings. Setting up large-scale electricity storage facilities will take up additional land and reduce efficiency. In  view  of  this,  many  countries  and  cities  have high hopes for the development of new zero-carbon energy, such as hydrogen produced by RE (green  hydrogen).    However,  many  technologies covering the production, transportation or application  of  zero-carbon  energy  are  still  at  the  R&amp;D stage, and have yet to be developed into mature, reliable and price-competitive options.  With the imminent threat of climate change supported by evidence,  the  whole  world  must  act  quickly  to reduce  carbon  emissions,  and  cannot  afford  to just wait for the development of new technologies. Having regard to considerations of maturity, reliability  and  affordability,  many  countries  have included nuclear energy as one of the technologies for helping achieve carbon neutrality by the middle of this century.  At present, about a quarter of  Hong  Kong's  electricity  is  generated  from nuclear energy.
- 4.3.5 Apart from developing RE as far as possible, we will continue to increase the use of natural gas with lower carbon emissions and zero-carbon energy to replace coal for electricity generation in the medium term.  We will also explore the supply of new zero-carbon energy by collaborating with neighbouring regions to participate in  and  operate  zero-carbon  energy  projects near  Hong  Kong  through  joint  ventures  and joint development, etc.  Priority will be given to RE  where  practicable,  noting  the  concern  of some over the increased use of nuclear energy. However,  noting  the  limited  potential  of  RE development in Hong Kong, the strong demand for RE by our country and neighbouring areas striving to achieve carbon neutrality

as  well  as  the  uncertainties  involved  in  new zero-carbon  energy  development,  we  must explore all practicable options and cannot rule out any kind of zero-carbon energy, including increasing the use of nuclear energy in the fuel mix as part of the transition to achieve carbon neutrality.

- 4.3.6 Maintaining a certain proportion of local power generation  for reliable electricity supply  is important.  Therefore, we must, at the same time, explore and try out other types of zero-carbon energy (e.g. hydrogen energy) for electricity generation  in  Hong  Kong,  and  progressively increase  their  application.    The  Government and the power companies are actively studying the development and application of new energy such as hydrogen, including importing hydrogen or other forms of new energy for use as fuels, so that they may be adopted for trial and application in Hong Kong when the technologies become relatively mature.  We hope that technological  advancement  will  allow  Hong Kong to achieve net-zero electricity generation before  2050 by the adoption of hydrogen or other forms of zero-carbon energy and technologies in local electricity generation.

## What is zero-carbon energy ?

Zero-carbon energy refers to energy which does not generate carbon emissions during their production or usage. Zero-carbon energy  under  application  in  Hong  Kong currently  includes  solar,  wind  and  nuclear energy.  We are also closely monitoring the development  of  new  zero-carbon  energy (e.g. green hydrogen), and will seize the opportunity to adopt such energy as the technologies become relatively mature.

The solar energy generation system installed by HK Electric at its Lamma Power Station

<!-- image -->

0.0-7%

3-4%

1-4%

subsequently)

continuous technological advancement and the active participation of the community, we

expect that solar energy would be able to meet demand by 2035, and the total share of RE in

around 1% to 2% of Hong Kong's electricity

Hong Kong's fuel mix would reach 7.5% to 10%.

## Medium-term targets: Phasing out coal for electricity generation · Developing RE

- 4.3.7   Coal,  accounting  for  around  a  quarter  in  the current fuel mix for electricity generation, emits the  highest  level  of  carbon  emissions.  Hong Kong has ceased to build coal-fired generation units since 1997 and has been gradually phasing  out  the  existing  units.  By  2035,  we  will cease using coal for daily electricity generation and  will  only  keep  it  for  providing  backup support. Coal will be replaced by natural gas with lower carbon emissions and zero-carbon energy (e.g. RE and nuclear energy) by then.

An offshore wind farm at the GBA

- 4.3.8 To  expedite  transformation  to  low-carbon energy, we are committed to increasing the share  of  RE  in  the  fuel  mix  for  electricity generation from less than 1% at present to 7.5% to 10% by 2035.

## RE Potential (Until 2035)

<!-- image -->

- 4.3.9  To achieve this target, we will strive to develop more advanced waste-to-energy facilities, including the infrastructure for recycling of food waste  and  construction  of  another  large-scale integrated  waste  management  facility.  It  is estimated  that  around  3%  to  4%  of  Hong Kong's electricity demand would be met by the electricity generated by such facilities by 2035.
- 4.3. 1 0  The  Government and the two power companies are reviewing proposals to develop offshore wind farms. The two power companies expect that improvement in the design of wind farms and the adoption of new technologies  can  increase  the  amount  of  electricity generated  and the  economic  benefits.  Our preliminary estimate shows that by 2035, the wind energy generated would be able to meet around 3.5% to 4% of Hong Kong's electricity demand.
- 4.3. 1 1  The  Government  has  introduced  with  the power companies the FiT Scheme in recent years to encourage the community to develop distributed  RE,  such  as  solar  energy.  The Government has also developed a wide range of  RE  projects  in  various  premises,  such  as reservoirs, restored landfills, government buildings and other suitable facilities. With the continuous technological advancement and the active  participation  of  the  community,  we expect that solar energy would be able to meet around  1%  to  2%  of  Hong  Kong's  electricity demand by 2035, and the total share of RE in Hong Kong's fuel mix would reach 7 .5% to 1 0%.

An offshore wind farm at the GBA

<!-- image -->

allon oyotels on the lourope or aureole blocks of existing public rental housing

appropriate types of solar energy generation estates where technically feasible.

systems in suitable water channels.

4.3.14 We will also make use of landfills to generate

RE. Apart from utilising landfill gas for electrici- installation of solar energy generation systems

ty generation, we are actively exploring the applying RE, the Government will explore ways

to facilitate the installation of RE systems by the private sector on their land and properties,

such as measures to facilitate installation of solar energy generation systems by the private

sector in open car parks. Coupled with the at restored landfills. For instance, EPD will

FiT Scheme, this can help foster the develop- ment of RE.

4.3. 12    The Government will continue to take the lead in developing RE and strive to incorporate RE technologies  in  all  capital  works  projects. We  will  update  the  Government  circular  on Green  Government  Buildings  and  raise  the requirements of applying RE technologies in new government buildings. For instance, the proportion of available roof space for installing RE systems will be increased from the current 10% to 25%. We will also continue to install RE systems in existing government buildings (including outdoor parking lots) as far as possible.

launch a pilot scheme on solar energy generation at the South East New Territories Landfill in Tseung Kwan O.

4.3. 13    Reservoirs  in  the  open  air  offer  more  space and potential for installing solar energy generation systems. Building on the success of the pilot projects of floating solar energy generation systems at Shek Pik Reservoir and Plover Cove  Reservoir,  the  Water  Supplies  Department  (WSD)  plans  to  install  larger  floating solar energy generation systems with a generating capacity of 5-10 megawatts (MW) each at  various  reservoirs,  including  Plover  Cove Reservoir,  Shek  Pik  Reservoir  and  Tai  Lam Chung Reservoir. In addition, WSD  has embarked on a study on installing a floating solar energy generation system with a generating capacity of over 100 MW at Plover Cove Reservoir. The project is estimated to generate more than 100 million kWh of electricity a year, meeting about 0.2% of Hong Kong's electricity demand. The Government is also exploring the feasibility of installing floating or  other appropriate types of solar energy generation systems in suitable water channels.

4.3. 1 4    We will also make use of landfills to generate RE. Apart from utilising landfill gas for electricity generation, we are actively exploring the installation of solar energy generation systems at  restored  landfills.  For  instance,  EPD  will

4.3. 1 5    Since  May  2011, the Housing Authority has been installing solar energy generation systems  at  domestic  blocks  of  new  public rental housing estates where it is technically feasible  and  the  rooftop  conditions  permit, with the target to provide at least 1.5% of the communal electricity consumption. In addition to new domestic blocks, the Government will explore the installation of solar energy generation  systems  on  the  rooftops  of  domestic blocks of existing public rental housing estates where technically feasible.

The solar energy generation system installed by the Housing Authority at Shui Chuen O Estate

<!-- image -->

4.3. 1 6    T o assist the private sector in developing and applying RE, the Government will explore ways to facilitate the installation of RE systems by the private sector on their land and properties, such as measures to facilitate installation of solar energy generation systems by the private sector in open car parks.  Coupled with the FiT Scheme, this can help foster the development of RE.

The floating solar energy generation system at Shek Pik Reservoir

<!-- image -->

estimated to be about 950 000 kWh.

Food Wate A

inhic Co-digesticn

4.3. 1 7    The  Government,  together  with  the  power companies, will also explore ways to enhance regional  cooperation  on  zero-carbon  energy and identify sources of zero-carbon energy in neighbouring regions, including seeking joint investment and development opportunities for participating in and operating zero-carbon energy projects near Hong Kong.  We will also keep abreast of developments in technologies that utilise RE for electricity generation.

## Implementation of food waste and sewage sludge co-digestion to enhance waste-to-energy transformation

The Food Waste/Sewage Sludge Anaerobic Co-digestion Trial Scheme, jointly launched by  Drainage  Services  Department  (DSD) and EPD at Tai Po Sewage Treatment Works (STW), was commissioned in May 2019 to receive  food  waste  for  food  waste/sewage sludge anaerobic co-digestion.  Apart from increasing the biogas yield and reducing the amount of digestate and carbon emissions from the Tai Po STW, the pilot scheme can also  enhance  Hong  Kong's  food  waste treatment  capacity  and  turn  waste  into electricity. Under this trial scheme, up to 50 tonnes of food waste can be treated per day, and the energy to be generated annually is estimated to be about 950 000 kWh.

Facility for food waste/sewage sludge anaerobic co-digestion at Tai Po STW

<!-- image -->

The  second  Food  Waste/Sewage  Sludge Anaerobic  Co-digestion  Trial  Scheme  will be conducted at Shatin STW, in which the treatment of food waste from commercial, industrial  and  domestic  sources  will  be tested. The estimated food waste treatment capacity is 50 tonnes per day, and the relevant works are expected to be completed at the end of 2022.

4.3. 18    T o  achieve  the  target  of  reducing  the  total carbon  emissions  by  50%  from  the  2005 level before 2035, more options are needed for raising the share of zero-carbon energy in the fuel mix for electricity generation to about 60% to 70%.

## Development of innovative RE technology for better utilisation of existing resources

Flexible thin-film solar PV panels are malleable  and  suitable  for  application  on curved surfaces and surfaces of different shapes, facilitating the wider application of solar PV systems. Starting from 2019, DSD has installed in phases the high-efficiency Copper  Indium  Gallium  Selenide  (CIGS) thin-film  solar  PV  system  on  the  curved sedimentation  tank  covers,  occupying  an area of about 30 000 m² at Stonecutters Island  STW,  to  supply  electricity  for  the plant. The works project will be completed in 2024-25. Upon completion, this thin-film  solar  PV  installation  will  be  the largest of its kind in Hong Kong, with a total installed generation capacity of over 1 MW.

The thin-film solar PV system at Stonecutters STW

<!-- image -->

Besides, through the water tunnel under the Tolo Harbour Effluent Export Scheme, the effluent generated from DSD's Tai Po STW and Shatin STW is discharged into Victoria Harbour via Kai Tak River together with the collected  rainwater,  and  the  average  flow rate is more than 4 m ³ /s.  DSD is studying options for better utilisation of water flow by installing a hydro turbine system, with a view to generating  electricity  for  use  by  suitable government  facilities  in  the  Wong  Tai  Sin District.

moulavie generalis

ENERGY

SAVING

PLAN

For Hong Kong's Built Environment

2015~2025+

## Energy Saving and Green Buildings

4.4.1 Being an international financial and commercial centre,  the  majority  of  Hong  Kong  citizens' daily  activities  take  place  in  skyscrapers.  The resulting  use  of  air-conditioners,  lifts,  lighting and various electrical appliances consumes a large amount of energy. Buildings account for about  90%  of  Hong  Kong's  total  electricity consumption,  and  over  60%  of  our  carbon emissions is attributable to generating electricity for our buildings. Achieving net-zero electricity generation requires enormous amount  of  capital  and  resources,  and  will increase the cost of electricity generation. Various  sectors  of  the  community  and  members of the public will inevitably have to share the cost. Through regulation as well as promotion and public education in energy saving, we can reduce the overall electricity consumption of  buildings,  and  hence  lower  the  cost  of adopting  new  zero-carbon  energy.  This  is conducive to maintaining Hong Kong's overall competitiveness  in  the  global  arena,  in  turn benefitting enterprises and citizens. The benefits will be even more significant if the amount of energy conserved exceeds the increase in the cost of achieving net-zero electricity generation.

Hong Kong's Electricity Consumption in 2019

<!-- image -->

## Long-term targets: Reduce the electricity consumption of commercial buildings by 30% to 40%, and that of residential buildings by 20% to 30% by 2050

4.4.2 The Energy Saving Plan for Hong Kong's Built Environment  2015~2025+  promulgated  by the  Government  in  2015  has  set  a  target  of reducing  energy  intensity  by  40%  by  2025. So far, the energy intensity in Hong Kong has decreased by over 30%. We are also one of the best performers in terms of reduction in energy intensity among the member economies of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation. As  mentioned  above,  buildings  account  for about  90%  of  Hong  Kong's  total  electricity consumption,  and  over  60%  of  our  carbon emissions is attributable to generating electricity for our buildings.  In  order to  achieve  carbon neutrality, we need to  step  up  efforts in promoting energy conservation in buildings, and set a more proactive and targeted energy saving goal. In this connection, we will strive  to  gradually reduce  the  electricity consumption  of  new  and existing commercial

<!-- image -->

buildings by 30% to 40%, and that of residential buildings by 20% to 30% by 2050, using the  operational  conditions  of  2015  as  the comparison basis.

- 4.4.3 To achieve the above targets, we need to adopt a multi-pronged approach in planning for energy conservation. The Government will lead and coordinate efforts in the continuous refinement of energy saving strategies.  We will make use of the prevailing legal basis to continue to enhance the energy performance of buildings and  appliances,  and  promote  the  systematic exploration  and  realisation  of  decarbonisation opportunities  in  buildings.  Outside  the  legal framework,  we  will  also  consider  encouraging the  trades  to  proactively  raise  energy  saving performance to a new level beyond the statutory requirements.
- 4.4.4 We will work on the infrastructure by integrating energy efficient facilities in development projects.  We  will  study  the  feasibility  of incorporating DCS in more new development areas, such as Hung Shui Kiu/Ha Tsuen New Development Area and the artificial islands in the  Central  Waters,  so  as  to  promote  energy efficiency and mitigate the heat island effect in the areas.

Covironment Bureas »

Development Bureau

Transport and Housing Bureau

- 4.4.5  We will also watch out for and make full use of  the  energy  saving  opportunities  arising from green I&amp;T development, and strive for breakthroughs  in  various  fields.  For  example,  we  will  study  innovative  energy-saving technologies to further improve the energy efficiency performance  of buildings  and DCSs,  including  the  use  of  big  data  and artificial  intelligence,  etc.,  to  optimise  the operation of the facilities.
- 4.4.6 Government-led  measures  alone  are  not sufficient. To maximise the effectiveness of energy saving measures, we should pursue tripartite collaboration that involves the community,  the  business  sector  and  the Government. We will promote cross-sector cooperation through different platforms to pursue our shared vision in energy saving.

## Medium-term targets: Reduce the electricity consumption of commercial buildings by 15% to 20%, and that of residential buildings by 10% to 15% by 2035

- 4.4.7  To  promote  continuous  decarbonisation  in buildings,  we  have  also  set  a  medium-term target of reducing the electricity consumption of new and existing commercial buildings by 15% to 20%, and that of residential buildings by 10% to 15% by 2035, using the operational conditions  of  2015  as  the  comparison  basis. More  green  innovations  and  energy  efficient elements will also be added to the design of new government  buildings  to  achieve  an  energy efficiency  performance  of  10%  better  than statutory level, with a view to leading the trades to further optimise the energy efficiency performance of new buildings.
- 4.4.8  To  continuously  improve  the  energy  efficiency standards of buildings, we will make reference to the international standards and harness innovative  and  intelligent  technologies  to  ensure  the energy efficiency standards of building services installations  are  up  to  date.  We  will  actively explore the possibility of expanding the scope of regulation to cover all buildings with high energy consumption,  such  as  data  centres,  so  as  to further  enhance  the  overall  energy  efficiency performance of buildings in Hong Kong.
- 4.4.9  To explore and utilise decarbonisation opportunities in a systematic manner, we will consider conducting energy audits more frequently and mandating the implementation of identified energy management opportunities. At the same time, we will strengthen the promotion of RCx to check the performance of the existing buildings in energy and other areas and make appropriate adjustments to the systems, with a view to reducing electricity consumption. We will consider requiring large commercial buildings to carry out regular commissioning of air-conditioning systems and major building services installations to achieve optimal operational efficiency.
- 4.4. 1 0 In addition, we will continue to encourage and promote enhancement of energy efficiency in

buildings to outperform the statutory requirements through the Hong Kong Energy Efficiency Registration Scheme for Buildings. We will collaborate with the trades and stakeholders  to  continue  to  explore  acceptance  of different forms and accredited certification schemes  as  registration  requirements  so  that more  buildings  can  achieve  energy  efficiency performance above the statutory requirements.

## For energy saving, many a little makes a mickle

The Government has been taking the lead in energy  saving.  As  mentioned  in  Chapter  2 above, the Government achieved the five-year target  of  reducing  electricity  consumption  in government buildings by 5% in 2018-19, one year ahead of schedule, and achieved a final electricity saving of about 7 .8%. We have also set  a  new  Green  Energy  Target  to  further improve the energy performance of the whole Government by 6% by 2024-25.

Carbon reduction cannot be achieved by the Government  alone.  The  active  participation  of every member of the society is essential. We will  foster  support  for  the  carbon  neutrality target  in  the  business  sector  through  the 'Carbon Neutrality'  Partnership. At the same time, we strive to encourage members of the community to practise low-carbon living in line with the spirit of energy saving. The Government has put in place the one-stop Energy Saving for All website (www.energysaving.gov.hk) to provide diverse  and  practical  information  on  energy saving  for  members  of  the  public.  We  will continue to regularly update the website, including various energy saving tips in daily lives. Let us  work  together  to  strive  towards  carbon neutrality!

<!-- image -->

dings. The two power er 1 600

ser 2018

• 1 280

approved

3y-saving such as

ditioning ects and

smart power

BUILDING

FUND

4.4.11To reduce electricity consumption on air-conditioning for  commercial buildings and  hotels,  the  Building  (Energy  Efficiency) Regulation  (Cap.  123M)  and  the  relevant codes of practice and practice notes require the external walls and roofs of these buildings  to  be  designed  and  constructed  with suitable Overall Thermal Transfer Value (OTTV).  The  Government  is  conducting  a review on the OTTV, and plans to complete the  review  for  tightening  up  the  statutory standards  by  2025. The  Government  also plans to complete two reviews on the Residential  Thermal  Transfer  Value  (RTTV) by 2023 and 2030. To lead by example, the OTTV of new government buildings will be at least 10% above the statutory standards. Buildim

4.4. 12 To strengthen the promotion of green buildings in the private sector, we will continue to share experience with stakeholders and explore  strategies  and  measures  to  achieve deep decarbonisation of buildings. In pursuance of carbon neutrality, we will upgrade the '4T' Partnership to 'Carbon Neutrality' Partnership  to  cover  not  only  energy  saving and green buildings but also other carbon reduction actions.

4.4. 13 As  for  infrastructure,  following  the  Kai  Tak Development, construction works of two more DCS projects in the Tung Chung New Town Extension  (East)  and  Kwu  Tung  North  New Development Area have commenced.  When the  two  DCSs  come  into  full  operation,  it  is estimated that about  70  million  kWh  of electricity can be saved annually, and about 49 000 tonnes of carbon emissions can be reduced (i.e. around 0.12% of Hong Kong's total carbon emissions).

4.4. 1 4 T o  mobilise  the  community  to  take  collective actions to conserve energy, we need to enhance the transparency of data and benchmarks. We plan  to,  through  releasing  energy  data  and introducing energy benchmarking tools, facilitate the comparison of building energy consumption  performance  and  establish  a two-way  partnership in carbon reduction. Indeed, the two power companies  are progressively installing smart meters for their customers  across  the  territory  according  to their  plans,  so  as  to  help  their  customers monitor and manage electricity consumption more effectively and encourage energy conservation.  Smart  meters  also  provide the smart infrastructure required for introducing demand-side management measures, such as consideration of setting time-of-use tariffs as in some other economies to encourage users to change their habits and reduce electricity consumption during peak demand hours.

DCS at Kai Tak Development

<!-- image -->

Smart  meters  can  monitor  and  manage  electricity  consumption more effectively

<!-- image -->

4.4. 1 5 The  concise  and  easy-to-understand  MEELS helps  members  of  the  public  practise  energy conservation in their consumption behaviour.  We will keep the scheme under review.  Apart from upgrading  the  grading  standards,  we  will  also consider  setting  a  minimum  energy  efficiency requirement  so  that  certain  appliances  must meet the minimum energy efficiency standards before they can be supplied in Hong Kong, with a  view  to  further  raising  the  energy  efficiency performance  of  products.  Moreover,  we  will consider expanding the scope of the scheme to cover non-domestic or commercial appliances.

## Enjoy subsidy for energy saving, reduce expenditure with decarbonisation

Under  the  current  Scheme  of  Control  Agreements, the two power companies have established  energy  efficiency  funds  to  provide subsidies of up to $0.5 million on a matching basis for energy-saving improvement works in various  types  of  buildings.  The  two  power companies received over 1 600 applications from October 2018 to  August  2021.  Over  1  280 applications have been approved for implementing energy-saving improvement  works,  such  as replacement of air-conditioning and lighting, RCx projects and installation  of  smart equipment  in  over 2 000 buildings.

<!-- image -->

****

Hong Kong

ROADMAP ON

CLEAN

POPULARISATION OF

ELECTRIC VEHICLES

AIR

PLAN

for Hong Kong

2035

## Green Transport

## Long-term target: Zero carbon emissions from vehicles and transport sector before 2050

4.5.1 As  shown  from  the  development  plans  of  car manufacturers  around  the  world,  adoption  of electric  transport  is  undoubtedly  the  trend.  In addition, many  manufacturers are actively developing other forms of new energy transport (e.g. hydrogen-powered heavy vehicles).

We expect to achieve the long-term target of zero carbon emissions from  vehicles and the transport  sector  before  2050  through  the electrification of vehicles and ferries, development of new energy transport and implementation of measures to improve traffic management.

## Medium-term target: Set a concrete timetable for adopting new energy public transport

4.5.2 The  measures  outlined  in  the  Hong  Kong Roadmap on Popularisation of Electric Vehicles announced by the Government in 2021 cover various  aspects,  including  ceasing  the  new registration of fuel-propelled and hybrid private cars in 2035 or earlier, as well as setting strategies  and  targets  for  providing  charging  facilities. Besides private cars, commercial vehicles, including  goods  vehicles,  buses,  light  buses and  taxis,  are  also  major  sources  of  carbon emissions. The Government will play an active role  in  developing  new  energy  transport,  and will partner with different sectors in the coming years  to  actively  test  the  technological  and commercial viability of various electric and new energy public transport and commercial vehicles, with a view to setting a more concrete way  forward  and  timetable  in  around  2025. A full-fledged charging network is also indispensable for supporting the popularisation of  EVs.  In  around  2025,  we  will  review  this year's target for the installation of charging facilities to keep  up  with the latest developments in EV.

Hong Kong Roadmap on Popularisation of Electric Vehicles

<!-- image -->

4.5.3 Apart  from  promoting  the  use  of  EVs,  the Government announced the Clean Air Plan for  Hong  Kong  2035  in  2021,  setting  out the vision of 'Healthy Living Low-carbon Transformation World  Class'.  The  Government will continue to push ahead with the work on reducing air pollutant emissions in Hong Kong and its neighbouring areas. The Plan also sets out policy directions to support application of green technologies in different areas to achieve low-carbon transformation, and the target of having air quality on a par with major international cities by 2035. Following the release of the Plan, the Government has set up an Interdepartmental  Working  Group  on  the  application  of hydrogen energy in Hong Kong. We plan to collaborate with the franchised bus companies and other stakeholders in the next three years to test out hydrogen fuel cell electric buses and heavy vehicles.

Clean Air Plan for Hong Kong 2035

<!-- image -->

March 2021

nance of hydrogen tuel cell Evs, etc.

Links by the Private Sector: Developers can with premium waiver.

H2 SA NE

construct pedestrian links at their own costs

Hydrogen-fuelled delivery vehicle in the Mainland

## Hydrogen fuel cell vehicles

Hydrogen  fuel  cell  EVs  are  gaining  traction, especially in application for medium to large as well  as  medium-haul  and  long-haul  vehicles. Cities  in  the  Mainland,  Europe  and  America have  begun  trials  of  hydrogen-fuelled  singledeck and double-deck buses, and are planning for the establishment of hydrogen fil l i ng networks.  Neighbouring  Guangdong  Province has  established  hydrogen  production  facilities which can provide a stable hydrogen supply to Hong Kong. We will also study the feasibility of using hydrogen-fuelled transport in Hong Kong, and consider the necessary supporting facilities, including construction of hydrogen fil l i ng facilities that meet the specifications, and train relevant technicians in the safe use and maintenance of hydrogen fuel cell EVs, etc.

Hydrogen-fuelled delivery vehicle in the Mainland

<!-- image -->

Overseas hydrogen-fuelled double-deck bus

<!-- image -->

4.5.4 We will also keep track of the latest technological developments  of  other  heavy  vehicles  (e.g. container  trucks,  heavy  goods  vehicles  and refuse collection vehicles, etc.) and introduce electric or other new energy vehicles for trial in a  timely  manner.    As  regards  ferries,  the Government  will  subsidise  ferry  operators  to conduct  trials  for  electric  and  hybrid  ferries. Subject  to  the  trial  results  and  relevant technological  developments,  the  Government will  explore  with  the  ferry  operators  the possibility of progressively replacing traditional ferries with new energy ferries before 2035.  To tie  in  with  the  application  of  new  energy  in various means  of transport, government departments will step up efforts to support and  facilitate  the  development  of  relevant infrastructure and ancillary facilities.

the Island Eastern Corridor

## Providing a convenient pedestrian network

Enhancing  the  pedestrian  network:  TD  is taking forward walkability enhancement measures and will implement a comprehensive pedestrian  planning  framework  in  suitable new development areas and built-up areas.

Universal Accessibility Programme: Launched in 2012 to retrofit more barrier-free access facilities (e.g. lifts) at public walkways. As  of  July  2021,  171  items  have  been completed.

Harbourfront promenade: Harbourfront enhancement  projects  can  improve  the pedestrian linkage system on both sides of the Victoria Harbour and create a pedestrian-friendly environment.

Facilitation Scheme for Provision of Pedestrian Links by the Private Sector: Developers can construct pedestrian links at their own costs with premium waiver.

Harbourfront  Promenade:  Boardwalk  underneath the Island Eastern Corridor

<!-- image -->

4.5.5 The  Government  will  continue  the  current approach  of  maintaining  a  public  transport system with railway as the backbone, and will adopt  different  new  technologies  as  well  as traffic management measures.  For instance, the Free-flow Tolling System will be rolled out at government tolled tunnels and the Tsing Sha Control Area, while 'congestion charging' will be  pressed  ahead  actively,  with  a  view  to charging different  toll  levels  according  to  the traffic condition of the tunnels and the Control Area during different time periods. We commenced  a  traffic  survey  in  September 2021  to  collect  the  latest  data  and  draw  up preliminary proposals for 'congestion charging' in 2022.  We hope the above traffic management  measures  will  be  able  to  enhance  the road  network  efficiency  and  reduce  carbon emissions from traffic congestion. Furthermore, the Government will continue to promote cycling for short-distance commuting  and  enhance walkability.

different plastic products

WASTE

February 2021

0/202 eND

BLUEPRINT

Pale Constation for Hong Kong 2035

AVOID USING SINGLE E

EX*+728

Danie www.pprs.hk

Regulation of

Disposable Plastic Tableware

9 July - 8 September

2021

Voluntary Scheme to

Phase Out Microbeads in Personal Care and

## Waste Reduction

4.6. 1 Waste contributes to about 7% of carbon emissions  in  Hong  Kong,  with  the  bulk  of  them being the GHG generated from decomposition of waste in landfills. The Government promulgated the Waste Blueprint for Hong Kong 2035 (the Waste Blueprint) early this year, advocating  the  vision  of  'Waste  Reduction · Resources Circulation · Zero Landfill' .  The  Waste  Blueprint sets out targets for per capita MSW disposal and  recovery  rate,  and  the  goal  of  developing adequate waste-to-energy facilities, with the aim to  move  away from the reliance on landfills for municipal waste disposal  b y   2 0 3 5 . Waste reduction and resources circulation will also help foster a  low-carbon and sustainable lifestyle.

Waste Blueprint for Hong Kong 2035

<!-- image -->

## Long-term target: Carbon neutrality in waste management

4.6.2 If  we  can  develop  adequate  waste-to-energy facilities so as to move away from over-reliance on  landfills  for  municipal  waste  disposal  by 2035 as planned, there will be no more municipal waste disposal at landfills.  By 2050, most of the landfilled waste will have been decomposed,  which  will  significantly  reduce  GHG emissions, thus helping us achieve the target of carbon neutrality before 2050.

4.6.3 As  for  specific  actions,  we  have  to  take  a multi-pronged  approach  by  pressing  ahead with our promotion of waste reduction in parallel with waste separation and recycling. We also need to develop another waste-to-energy facility  to  process  municipal  waste,  continue  to expand our food waste recycling infrastructure, and make use of the biogas generated during the food waste treatment process as an additional source of RE. Only by doing so can we  move  away  from  reliance  on  landfills  for municipal waste disposal.

4.6.4 Among the various types of waste, plastics in particular  generate  GHG  in  their  entire  life cycle, from the extraction of crude oil, the manufacturing  process  to  post-disposal  treatment. Reducing  the  use  of  single-use  plastics  with readily available alternative can therefore reduce GHG emissions. Currently, plastics take up  about  20%  of  the  total  amount  of  MSW disposed  of  at  landfills.    We  will  map  out  a long-term solution and  go  'plastic-free'  by adopting a multi-pronged approach, which includes formulating suitable policies and regulations, stepping up publicity, and expanding waste plastics recycling supporting facilities for  turning  waste  into  resources,  as  well  as encouraging  the  public  to  replace  single-use plastics with reusable or alternative materials.

## Strengthening regulation on different plastic products

Public consultation on Producer Responsibility Scheme on Plastic Beverage Containers

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Public engagement on control of single-use plastics

<!-- image -->

Public consultation on Scheme on Regulation of Disposable Plastic Tableware

<!-- image -->

Bye Bye Microbeads Charter

16 16 82 85

Other Plastice

## Medium-term target: Enhance waste reduction and recycling

Recycling Stores encourage the public to cultivate habits of waste reduction and recycling

<!-- image -->

4.6.5 Through  implementing  MSW  charging  and other waste reduction and recycling initiatives, and encouraging the whole community to work together,  we  aim  to  progressively  reduce  the per capita MSW disposal by 40% to 45% and raise the recovery rate to about 55%.

4.6.6 Enhancing recycling is also an integral part of decarbonisation at source. We will continue to expand  and  enhance  the  central  collection services  for  food  waste,  waste  plastics  and waste paper. The community recycling network covering  all  districts  in  Hong  Kong  will  be enhanced  to  cover  more  areas  and  target participants, thereby raising the effectiveness of recycling. Besides, we will further promote low-carbon  transformation of the recycling trade  by  supporting  the  industry  to  apply technologies to produce high value-added products  and  achieve  re-industrialisation  as well  as  circular  economy;  and  consolidating and strengthening downstream recovery, recycling  and  waste-to-resources  capabilities, in  order  to  achieve  the  targets  of  reducing waste and carbon emissions.

- 4.6.7 In the meantime, we will enhance the recovery of landfill gases from the three landfills currently in operation for providing thermal energy and electricity  to  support  landfill  operation  and export to the gas company and power grids to provide energy for the public.

Glass Bottles

## Climate Budget

4.7 .1 Over  the  past  decade,  the  Government  has allocated over $47 billion to implement various energy  saving  and  RE  measures,  promote electric  vehicles  and  vessels,  and  introduce innovative waste-to-energy and waste-to-resources facilities  to  help  reduce  waste  and  carbon emissions.

- 4.7 .2   The  Government  plans  to  allocate  about $240 billion in the next 15 to 20 years to implement  mitigation  and  adaptation  measures  to combat  climate  change,  including  the  four main actions mentioned in this Chapter, covering  energy  saving  and  green  buildings,  RE, green transport and waste management, etc. Moreover, the Government will undertake measures to adapt to climate change, including strengthening coastal defences, stabilising slopes  and  conducting  drainage  improvement works, etc. The relevant government departments will ascertain the details and estimated expenditure of individual projects in due course.
- 4.7 .3   The Government Green Bond Programme (GGBP) established in 2018 provides funding for the Government's green public works projects. The Government successfully offered  its  inaugural  green  bond  with  a  total issuance  size  of  US$1  billion  in  May  2019, while the second Government green bond with a  total  issuance  size  of  US$2.5  billion  was successfully offered in January 2021. Proceeds  from  the  bonds  have  been  fully allocated  to  or  earmarked  for  eligible  public works  projects,  including  RE  power  systems, waste-to-energy  facilities,  and  DCSs  which help save energy, etc.

<!-- image -->

4.7 .4 On  the  other  hand,  as  Hong  Kong  moves towards the target of net-zero electricity generation, the power companies also have to develop and adopt more zero-carbon energy, and invest in and develop in phases the necessary equipment  and  infrastructure  such  as  large-scale wind power  generation  and  hydrogen  power generation facilities.  It  would  be  difficult  to ascertain at this stage the cost of such additional investment  which  would  depend  on  a range of factors, such as the development of decarbonisation technologies and  the scale  of  facilities. Early planning of and orderly investment  in  the  relevant  infrastructure  can help  spread  the  cost  impact  over  a  longer period  of  time.  In  addition,  the  overall  energy efficiency  can  be  enhanced  through  utilising innovative  and  smart  technologies  as  well  as promoting energy saving measures. This in turn reduces  the  costs  of  shifting  to  zero-carbon energy and alleviates the upward pressure on energy bills.

## Education and Training

4.8.1  We  will  broaden  school  teachers'  knowledge about climate change.  Schools may strengthen the  relevant learning materials in different subjects and  provide  diversified learning experiences, so as to enhance students' awareness of climate change and its impacts, encourage  the  students  to  practise  what  they  have learned,  and  promote  low-carbon  transformation. To nurture professional talent, we need to  incorporate  learning  materials  relating  to climate  change,  low-carbon  technologies  and green finance, etc. into the relevant curricula in universities and tertiary institutions in a timely manner, and enhance cooperation and exchange among universities and tertiary institutions, so that both teachers and students can keep abreast of the latest developments, and equip themselves with the relevant professional knowledge  and  skills. For instance, demand  for  EV  technical  and  maintenance practitioners from the local automotive engineering sector has been increasing. The Hong Kong Institute  of  Vocational  Education  has  added elements of EV technologies and maintenance to the relevant programmes for students to keep up with the latest developments in the automotive engineering industry. The School of Business and Management and the Division of Environment and Sustainability  at  The  Hong  Kong  University  of Science and Technology (HKUST) announced in September  this  year  that  they  would  jointly

- offer the first Bachelor of Science in Sustainable and Green Finance Program in Hong Kong to equip students with interdisciplinary knowledge and nurture them to become sustainable and green finance talent.

4.8.2 We will organise more educational activities of different nature to raise the awareness of the community about climate change, encourage them to practise low-carbon and sustainable lifestyles, and encourage young people to participate in the work of promoting environmental  protection  and  awareness  of climate change.

Various  educational  activities  can  enhance  public  awareness  of combating climate change and practising low-carbon lifestyle

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

erm task.

iris Agree- ction Plan

tegies and actions to

## Steering and Coordination

Solar panels have been installed in many places on

- 4.9.1  The  Steering  Committee  on  Climate  Change and Carbon Neutrality under the chairmanship of  the  Chief  Executive  was  established  in mid-2021 to formulate the overall strategy at the highest level and oversee implementation and coordination.  We will adopt a whole-government  approach  to  formulate  more  holistic and proactive decarbonisation measures, and implement decarbonisation action plans in our pursuit of the carbon neutrality target.
- 4.9.2  To  ensure  effective  implementation  of  the measures and follow-up actions, ENB will set up the Office of Climate Change and Carbon Neutrality to strengthen coordination and promote deep decarbonisation, etc. ENB had also set up  an  inter-departmental  Carbon Neutrality T ask Force this year, bringing together the experts from relevant departments  to explore forward-looking decarbonisation policies, having  regard  to  the  latest  developments  in advance decarbonisation technologies globally.
- 4.9.3  Combating climate change is a long-term task. We will, in line with the spirit of the Paris Agreement, review Hong Kong's Climate Action Plan about every five years to update the strategies and targets for decarbonisation and other actions to combat climate change.

<!-- image -->

## Public Engagement

- 4.10.1  The  work  of  combating climate change is of such depth and breadth that requires advice from a dedicated advisory committee. We will explore  ways to establish a dedicated advisory committee  on  climate  change  through  the integration of the existing advisory platforms, with the aim to encourage different sectors in the  community,  including  our  young  generation, to actively participate in climate actions. On  the  basis  of  the  existing  '4T'  dialogue platform, we will upgrade the  '4T'  Partnership  to  'Carbon  Neutrality'  Partnership. Apart from energy saving, we encourage our partners  from  various  sectors  to  set  targets and  timelines  for  the  development  of  RE, adoption of green transport and waste reduction,  etc.,  and  share  their  measures  and achievements.

## Universities' development plans to achieve carbon neutrality

A number of universities in Hong Kong have strived to make their campuses greener in order  to  achieve  sustainable  development. The Chinese University of Hong Kong has set a target of achieving carbon neutrality by 2038,  while  HKUST  has  established  a number of performance targets with respect to  reduction  in  energy  consumption,  GHG emissions  and  wasteloads,  and  has  also made  great  efforts  in  developing  RE  by installing  a  total  of  8  000  solar  panels  in over 50  locations  on  the  campus  since 2020. The project is estimated to generate around 3 million kWh of electricity per year, which is equivalent to the electricity consumption of 900 three-person families in Hong Kong per year.

Solar panels have been installed in many places on the campus of HKUST

<!-- image -->

## Chapter 5

## CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION AND RESILIENCE

- 5.1  To  combat  climate  change  effectively,  apart from implementing ambitious decarbonisation strategies, we also need to adopt a comprehensive strategy  on  climate  change  adaptation  and resilience to protect the life, health and property  of  the  people  from  extreme  weather  and strengthen the resilience of the community. We will, on the basis of the Hong Kong's Climate Action  Plan  2030+,  explore  the  measures Hong Kong must take before 2050 to enhance the adaptation and resilience capability.

## Adaptation

<!-- image -->

## Resilience

Prepare for emergencies

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Deal with extreme heat

<!-- image -->

Raise community awareness

- 5.2  Hong Kong, being a coastal city, is susceptible to  weather-related  threats  such  as  tropical cyclones, rainstorms and storm surges. Super Typhoons Hato and Mangkhut hit Hong Kong in 2017 and 2018 respectively, causing extensive damage, such as severe backflow of sea water  in  some  low-lying  areas  and  damage  to waterfront facilities, etc. Furthermore, climate change has resulted in a continuous rise in the sea  level,  posing  a  potential  threat  to  certain low-lying areas in the long run. In the face of more frequent extreme weather events, the Government must strengthen its critical public infrastructure,  step  up  coastal  protection,  and continue to enhance the flood resilience of the city and stabilise slopes, etc., in order to brace for  more frequent extreme weather events in the future.

Hundreds  of  civil  servants,  volunteers  and  contractors  worked together  to  remove  the  fallen  trees  after  the  onslaught  of  Super Typhoon Mangkhut in 2018

<!-- image -->

## Adaptation

- 5.3  With the accumulation of experience in combating extreme weather events, including tropical  cyclones  and  rainstorms,  Hong  Kong has laid a solid foundation for strengthening the design of buildings and infrastructure facilities, and enhancing drainage management and landslip  preventive  measures.  The  public  has become  increasingly  aware  of  climate  change, and is supportive of more government investment in measures to adapt to climate change. In fact, with the advancement in technologies and approaches in combating climate change, projects that aim to adapt to extreme weather can also beautify the environment. For instance, incorporating  the  concept  of  revitalising  water bodies  with  green  and  ecological  conservation elements into  drainage  works  can  also  promote greening,  biodiversity  and  beautification  of  the environment while maintaining effective drainage.
- 5.4  Hong  Kong  has  been  actively  participating  in international organisations on climate change to keep  updated  of  the  latest  developments  in policies and technologies for combating climate change. The Government will continue to formulate policies and plans to enhance the adaptive and resilience capabilities of the city in the light of the latest developments in climate science and relevant international standards,  including the  assessment  reports  published  by  the Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change (IPCC) of the United Nations (UN), projections of temperature and rainfall in Hong Kong, and projections of change in mean  sea level. Stakeholders  in  various  sectors  should  also implement  relevant  adaptation  and  resilience measures  on  their  premises  and  facilities  to minimise  the  impacts  and  losses  caused  by extreme weather.

Notes on Road Pavement Drainage Design and the design guide for drainage installation for

government buildings.

## Strengthening Infrastructure

- 5.5  The Government attaches great importance to the capability of Government's infrastructure in combating climate change and extreme weather, and established in 2016 the Climate Change Working Group on Infrastructure (CCWGI) under the  leadership  of  the  Civil  Engineering  and Development  Department  (CEDD)  to  coordinate  the  efforts  of  the  works  departments  in adapting to climate change. The Working Group has coordinated studies relating to the potential effects of extreme temperatures, extreme storm surges  and  super  typhoons  on  government critical infrastructure (CI).  The  CCWGI  will report its work plans and progress to the Steering Committee on Climate Change and Carbon Neutrality chaired by the Chief Executive.
- 5.6  The CCWGI updates the design standards for various types of infrastructure in a timely manner, taking into account the relevant climate change parameters. With reference to the Fifth Assessment Report published by the IPCC, the relevant  government  departments  had  in  the past few years updated the design manuals and guidance  notes,  including  Port  Works  Design Manual, Stormwater Drainage Manual, Guidance Notes on Road Pavement Drainage Design and the design guide for drainage installation for government buildings.
- 5.7  With  the  progressive  release  of  the  Sixth Assessment Report by the IPCC since August 2021, the CCWGI will take into account the relevant  assessment  reports  to  review  and update the relevant design standards for infrastructure in a timely manner as and when necessary.
- 5.8  The CCWGI  also conducts a number of studies, such as the resilience study of government CI in 2017, covering coastal structures, government buildings, drainage, water supply and  sewerage  facilities,  etc.  The  resilience study included strategic assessment and review  to  formulate  scopes  of  enhancement works.  The study was completed in 2020. The relevant  government  departments  will  formulate  measures  and  implementation  plans  to enhance their CI's resilience with reference to the recommendations of the study. The CCWGI also  shares  relevant  experience  and  findings with  public  organisations  and  public  utility undertakers  through  the  relevant  government departments, thereby facilitating the enhancement of the overall infrastructure resilience of our society.

Aberdeen South Breakwater

<!-- image -->

sponge cities and suitable artificial islands in their strategies for combating sea level rise and

coastal floods arising from climate change. We will closely monitor the international strate-

gies and developments that can provide useful reference.

## Combating Sea Level Rise and Marine Protection

- 5.9 Sea level rise will increase flood risk at coastal and low-lying locations.  T o enhance the capability of coastal areas to withstand strong waves in the long run, CEDD commenced a consultancy study in 2019 to comprehensively review the low-lying  coastal  or  windy  locations  in  Hong Kong, and to carry out investigations of related storm surges and waves in order to assess the impacts of extreme weather and climate change  at  those  locations.    The  Government plans to implement suitable improvement works  and  formulate  management  measures for some of the concerned low-lying coastal or windy locations in order of priority.
- 5.10 CEDD  also  plans  to  commence  a  strategic study on shoreline management to analyse the impacts of climate change on the development of  coastal  areas,  so  as  to  formulate  suitable long-term strategies and protection measures, and  to strengthen the capabilities of the Government and relevant stakeholders in coping with climate change.
- 5.11  Some coastal cities like Copenhagen and Amsterdam  are  considering  the  option  of  developing sponge cities and suitable artificial islands in their strategies  for  combating  sea  level  rise  and coastal floods arising from climate change. We will closely monitor the international strategies and developments that can provide useful reference.

with a total length of over 100 kilometres, as well as the implementation of 27 village flood

protection schemes in low-lying villages for combating extreme weather events such as

tropical cyclones and rainstorms.

Since

1995, DSD has eliminated 127 flooding

## Combating Extreme Rainstorms and Tropical Cyclones

- 5.12  Climate change increases rainfall intensity and aggravates the pressure on the drainage system. Enhancing flood prevention and drainage management can reduce flood risks. DSD has updated the Stormwater Drainage Manual by  including  the  impacts  on  the  drainage system design caused by rainfall increase and sea level rise due to climate change. DSD will continue to review the Drainage Master Plan of various  districts  in  Hong  Kong  to  assess  the flood risk, and allocate resources for implementing drainage improvement works.
- 5.13  DSD  has  adopted  the  'three-pronged  flood prevention strategy', i.e. stormwater interception at upstream, flood storage at midstream, and drainage improvement at downstream, to formulate  appropriate  flood  prevention  and drainage management measures. It has completed a number of major flood prevention projects,  including  four  drainage  tunnels  in Hong Kong Island  West,  Lai  Chi  Kok,  Tsuen Wan  and  Kai  Tak;  four  stormwater  storage schemes  in  Tai  Hang  Tung,  Sheung  Wan, Happy Valley and On Sau Road; and improvement works for rivers  in  the  New  Territories with a total length of over 100 kilometres, as well as the implementation of 27 village flood protection  schemes  in  low-lying  villages  for combating  extreme  weather  events  such  as tropical cyclones and rainstorms. Since 1995,  DSD  has  eliminated  127  flooding

Chai Wan Breakwater

<!-- image -->

Yuen Long Barrage Scheme, as well as actively promoting the introduction of stormwater

storage tank, flood lake, floodable area, river revitalisation, bioretention system, and other

sustainable drainage systems, etc. in new devel- opment areas.

blackspots.  For  the  remaining  four  flooding blackspots, the drainage improvement works at Pokfulam  Village  in Southern  District  have commenced and are expected to complete in 2024. The remaining three flooding blackspots are located at Shek Wu Wai in San Tin, Yuen Long, Lam Tsuen Valley Basin in Tai Po and on Chatham Road South in Tsim Sha Tsui. Improvement works will be carried out as soon as the planning and design works are completed. To further enhance the flood prevention and flood resilience capabilities of the city, DSD is also  planning,  designing  and  constructing  a number of drainage improvement works such as the  Inter-reservoirs  Transfer  Scheme  and  the Yuen Long Barrage Scheme, as well as actively promoting the introduction of stormwater storage  tank,  flood  lake,  floodable  area,  river revitalisation,  bioretention  system,  and  other sustainable drainage systems, etc. in new development areas.

Lower Shing Mun

Reservoir

## Inter-reservoirs Transfer Scheme

Through the construction of a 2.8 kilometres long water tunnel, the Inter-reservoirs T ransfer Scheme connects Kowloon Byewash Reservoir and Lower Shing Mun Reservoir, reducing the flood risk caused by the overflow from Kowloon Byewash Reservoir to the downstream areas such as the Lai Chi Kok, Cheung Sha Wan and Sham Shui Po areas. The  project can  also collect  an average  of  around  3.4  million  m³  of additional fresh water annually to achieve the  dual  goals  of  flood  prevention  and water conservation.

<!-- image -->

Happy Valley Underground Stormwater Storage Scheme: The stormwater storage tank has a capacity of 60 000 m³, which is equivalent to 24 standard swimming pools. It greatly reduces the flood risk to the low-lying areas of Wan Chai and Happy Valley

<!-- image -->

Kowloon Byewash

Reservior

Ianastlae warning and emergency actions.

CEDD has conducted airborne light detection and ranging surveys to produce territory-wide digital terrain

## MTRCL's flood prevention measures

EMSD requires MTRCL to formulate measures to cope with various emergencies, and conducts regular site inspections.  To tackle  the  threats  of  flooding  at  MTR stations  and  underwater  tunnels  caused  by inclement weather, MTRCL has implemented the following measures:

-  The entrances/exits of most MTR stations are  by  design  at  least  450  mm  above street level and equipped with 1.2 m high flood boards; waterproof doors are installed  at  the  underground  entrances/ exits connecting MTR stations and other facilities as needed; intercepting ditches or  floodgates  are  also  installed  at  the entrances/exits  connecting  depots  and railway tunnels where necessary to prevent ingress of flood water
-  Underground  stations  and  tunnels  are equipped with water pumps
-  Emergency  procedures  for  coping  with catastrophic floods have been formulated to evacuate passengers from MTR stations  as  soon  as  possible  in  case  of emergency, and drills are conducted on a regular basis
- 5.14 With regard to railway and road infrastructure, MTRCL  carries  out  the  design,  construction and maintenance of the flood protection and drainage systems of the railway and its facilities in accordance with the requirements stipulated by DSD. MTRCL also reviews and formulates the preventive  measures  regularly,  and  strengthens the protective equipment as needed. As for road facilities, the Highways Department (HyD) regularly reviews and updates relevant design manuals and guidance notes. Public road facilities  such  as  road  tunnels  and  pedestrian subways under the purview of HyD should be equipped  with  proper  drainage  systems  in accordance with the relevant design manuals and guidance notes to drain water ingress from various sources.

inanantians

## New technologies to cope with extreme rainstorm events

CEDD  proactively makes  use  of  new technologies  to  collect  data  to  enhance the efficiency of slope works and landslide warning and emergency actions.

CEDD  has  conducted  airborne  light  detection  and ranging surveys to produce territory-wide digital terrain models to identify landslide hazards

<!-- image -->

CEDD has introduced and developed quadruped robotic dogs,  to  assist  engineers  in  conducting  site  exploited inspections  and  collecting  field  data  at  landslide  sites. The collected data can be used for analysing the cause of landslides and assessing residual landslide risk, so as to facilitate the design of emergency repair works

<!-- image -->

- 5.15 More  frequent  and  intense  rainstorm  events increase landslide risk. CEDD will continue to implement the Landslip Prevention and Mitigation Programme to upgrade government man-made  slopes  and  to  mitigate  natural terrain landslide risk. CEDD also endeavours to enhance the slope drainage design standard to improve the slope surface drainage system with the aim of strengthening the resilience of the slopes against extreme rainstorms.

Rainstorms increase the landslide risk of natural terrain

<!-- image -->

New Territories, including Sheung Shui and Fanling, for non-potable purposes.

## Combating Extreme Droughts and Safeguarding Water Supply

for future expansion to a daily capacity demand in Hong Kong, with provision

of up to 270 000 m3.

Desalinated water is a strategic water resource for

Hong Kong that is not susceptible to the impacts of climate change The ahove nhoto is Tselino Kwan O.

- 5.16 WSD has updated the Total Water Management Strategy to cater for the forecast water demand up to  2040.  The  updated  Strategy  adopts  a two-pronged approach with emphasis on containing  fresh  water  demand  growth  and building resilience in the fresh water supply to cope  with  the  extreme  effects of climate change with diversified water resources.
- 5.17 To  achieve  the  goal  of  reducing  the  average fresh water per capita consumption by 10% in 2030,  using  2016  as  the  base  year,  and containing the fresh water demand at the level of around 1 billion m ³   per annum before 2040, WSD  is  taking  forward  three  major  water demand management initiatives, namely water  conservation,  water  loss  management and expansion of the use of lower grade water (viz. seawater and recycled water) for non-potable purposes.

## Shek Wu Hui Effluent Polishing Plant and Water Reclamation Plant

DSD  is  implementing  the  reconstruction of the existing  Shek  Wu  Hui Sewage Treatment Works in phases to increase the treatment capacity to 190 000 m³ per day, and to upgrade the  sewage  treatment  level  to  tertiary standard for upgrading to a 'Shek Wu Hui Effluent Polishing Plant'.

Upon  the  completion  of  the  facility, WSD will produce reclaimed water by further  processing  a  portion  of  the tertiary  treated  sewage  effluent  and supply to the north-eastern part of the New Territories, including Sheung Shui and Fanling, for non-potable purposes.

Shek Wu Hui Effluent Polishing Plant and Water Reclamation Plant (artist's impression)

<!-- image -->

- 5.18 WSD  enhances implementation of various water demand management initiatives through wide adoption of smart technologies, including establishment of the Water Intelligent Network and installation of the Automatic Meter Reading, etc. Construction of the relevant infrastructure  for  expanding  the  use  of  lower grade water for non-potable purposes, including  the  reclaimed  water  supply  system  in Sheung Shui and Fanling and the grey water recycling supply system at the Anderson Road Quarry  Development  site,  is  in  progress  for supplying recycled water to the public in phases starting from 2024. WSD will continue to expand  the use of recycled water to other new development areas and areas where fresh water  is  supplied  for  flushing  wherever  it  is technically feasible and cost-effective.
- 5.19 On the other hand, WSD is enhancing resilience in the fresh water supply to cope with the impacts of climate change ﹙ by constructing the first stage of the desalination plant in T seung Kwan O.

## Grey water recycling system for Anderson Road Quarry Development

WSD is constructing a centralised grey water recycling  system  where  grey water (viz. water collected from baths, showers,  wash  basins,  kitchen  sinks and washing machines etc.) collected from inhabitants at the Anderson Road Quarry Development site will be treated and supplied for on-site flushing  and  other  non-potable  purposes. The  system  will  have  a  treatment capacity of 3 300 m³ per day.

Grey Water Treatment Plant for Anderson Road Quarry Development (artist's impression)

<!-- image -->

## Tseung Kwan O Desalination Plant

Hong  Kong  is  a  coastal  city  where seawater supply is abundant. To cope with the possible extreme dry weather, WSD is constructing the first stage of Tseung  Kwan  O  Desalination  Plant  to exploit alternative water resources other than rainfall. The plant, targeted to be commissioned in 2023, will adopt the latest  reverse  osmosis  technology  in producing potable water that complies with  the  Hong  Kong  Drinking  Water Standards.  It will have a daily capacity of  about  135  000  m ³   that  will  meet around  5%  of  the  overall  fresh  water demand in Hong Kong, with provision for future expansion to a daily capacity of up to 270 000 m³ .

Desalinated water is a strategic water resource for Hong Kong that is not susceptible to the impacts of climate change. The above photo is Tseung Kwan O Desalination Plant (artist's impression)

<!-- image -->

requirements on thermal expansion joints of building components in anticipation of extreme

temperature in the future.

5.21 To further promote green buildings and to foster a quality and sustainable built environ-

ment, BD has commissioned a consultant to review the room to tighten the current mecha-

nism of granting gross floor area (GFA) conces-

## Combating Extreme Heat

- 5.20 We will continue to enhance building design and promote urban forestry with a view to alleviating and coping with temperature rise.  Based on  the  recommendations  of  the  Study  of Design Considerations for Government Infrastructures under Extreme Temperatures, ArchSD is coordinating with relevant departments  to  follow  up  and  review  the  design standards  relating  to  public  infrastructure  and government buildings.  The work is expected to be largely completed in 2023. The Buildings Department (BD) is also reviewing the technical requirements on  thermal  expansion  joints  of building components in anticipation of extreme temperature in the future. 2022.
- 5.21 To  further  promote  green  buildings  and  to foster a quality and sustainable built environment, BD has commissioned a consultant to review the room to tighten the current mechanism of granting gross floor area (GFA) concessions  for  green  and  amenity  features  in  new private development projects. BD is working closely with stakeholders to formulate the implementation details of the new GFA concession mechanism which is targeted to be launched in 2022.

Hong Kong Velodrome Park in Tseung Kwan O |

Hong Kong Velodrome Park in Tseung Kwan O

<!-- image -->

achieving a sustainable and healthy urban forest.

802229

assessese

- 5.22 Promoting  urban  forestry  and  increasing  tree planting  can  lower  urban  temperature  and attenuate the heat island effect. The Development Bureau  is studying and  exploring feasible measures to improve the growing environment of urban trees, which include the application of smart technologies in tree management, review of  soil  volume  for  new  roadside  trees  and improvement of soil quality for existing planting areas. The Government will continue to promote  active  planting,  proper  maintenance and  preservation  practices  with  a  view  to achieving  a  sustainable  and  healthy  urban forest.

Kwun Tong Promenade

<!-- image -->

bootleroe computer systems and artificial intelligence.

Regional Information on Heavy Rain and

Thunderstorm

31 4

=

Weather Tips

Special Weather Tips

Localised Heavy Rain Advisory. Rain is particularly heavy in Tuen Mun District,

with more than 70 milimetres of hourly rainfall fallen or expected to fall and may

cause serious flooding

Residents who are Ikely to be affected are advised to take necessary precautions

to avoid possible flood damage. Heavy rain may bring about flash floods. People

should stay away from watercourses.

Drivers should beware that there are likely congestion.

to be serious road flooding and traffic

Updated at 1210 HKT 14/05/2021

## Resilience

## Contingency Plan for Natural Disasters

- 5.23 Extreme  weather  conditions  are  expected  to become more frequent due to climate change. The  Government  will  continue  to  strengthen preparation for and response to natural disasters, and  to  enhance  capabilities  in  post-disaster recovery.  Relevant  departments  will  enhance arrangements on the dissemination of information so  that  the  public  can  make  preparation  for appropriate  response  to,  and  recovery  from, natural disasters, with a view to mitigating the potential threats.
- 5.24 According to the Contingency Plan for Natural Disasters formulated by the Security Bureau, the Government  will act in preparedness, response and recovery to guard against natural disasters by enhancing situation assessment at the early stage, devising the response strategy and plan as well as redeploying resources and manpower in a timely manner.  In the event of natural disasters of a substantial scale, such as severe  rainstorm  and  serious  flooding  where extensive government emergency response operations are required, the Emergency Monitoring and Support Centre will be activated to provide a holistic response.
- 5.25 After the onslaught of Super Typhoon Mangkhut in Hong Kong in September 2018, the Government  has  conducted  an  inter-departmental review  of  the  handling  mechanism  to improve Hong Kong's preparedness for, emergency  response  to,  and  recovery  from  future super  typhoons  or  other  natural  disasters  of  a substantial  scale.    One  of  the  new  measures requires that in the event of a super typhoon or other natural disasters of a substantial scale, a high-level inter-departmental Steering Committee chaired by the Chief Secretary for Administration  (CS)  will  be  set  up,  as  and  when necessary,  to  oversee  the  work  of  relevant bureaux and departments and to set priorities in  a  coordinated  manner.    Should  a  super typhoon or other natural disasters of a substantial scale cause damages that paralyse the city and  seriously  affect  the  working  public  to resume work, the CS, having regard to the views of the Steering Committee, may make a territory-wide  'Extreme  Conditions'  announcement to extend the time for resumption of work so as to minimise possible injuries to members of the public.

• 0 7 1. 17* д1210

- 5.26 In order to safeguard the life and property of the public, relevant bureaux and departments will conduct regular exercises of various forms to  enhance  preparedness  and  collaboration among  the  units  concerned  to  cope  with natural disasters.

## Warning and Monitoring

- 5.27 The  Hong  Kong  Observatory  (HKO)  closely monitors  weather  situation.  HKO  will  issue weather  warnings  and  bulletins for severe weather where necessary to remind members of  the  public,  particularly  those  in  vulnerable areas, to seek shelter in safe places and take corresponding precautionary measures to minimise losses.
- 5.28 Owing to the complex coastline of Hong Kong, the  degree  of  impacts  from  storm  surges associated  with  tropical  cyclones  can  vary significantly across different locations. HKO, in collaboration  with  District  Offices  and  DSD, has  established  an  early  alert  mechanism.

## Rainstorm forecast

HKO has been disseminating rainfall information through various channels to help the public get prepared. In May 2021, HKO launched the Localised Heavy Rain Advisory service, providing early alert on heavy rain in individual districts based on recorded rainfall and  forecast  rainfall  from  the  nowcasting system.  HKO plans to provide local weather forecast in greater detail through the use of technologies  such  as  higher  performance computer systems and artificial intelligence.

<!-- image -->

le

'e

Id all

In id

id id

1- id

le r-

/S

nt e-

IC

When  the  water  level  is  forecast  to  reach  the corresponding alert level under the influence of tropical  cyclones,  HKO  will  issue  SMS  alert messages to relevant government departments. District Offices will inform local residents and property management offices to take appropriate  preparatory  and  precautionary  measures, while DSD will mobilise manpower to provide assistance to the residents in the areas that are more vulnerable to flood risk.

- 5.29 In  addition,  DSD  has  set  up  an  Emergency Control Centre (ECC).  The Flood Monitoring and Reporting System in the ECC will monitor rainfall and water level of major rivers and channels in real-time.  DSD has installed telemetry systems in more than 140 locations to collect data such as tide level and water level at the sites and send them to the monitoring centre.  It can facilitate speedy  analysis  of  the  flooding  situation  and timely notification of other departments as and when necessary, so that the departments can be well prepared for rescue, evacuation and opening of temporary shelter.
- 5.30 The  Office  of  the  Communications  Authority has engaged local mobile network operators to set up an emergency alert system for dissemination of time-critical public announcements and messages by the Government via mobile networks to mobile service users during emergency situations, such as extreme weather, so that the public can adopt contingency measures quickly.

## Transport System

- 5.31 TD  has  formulated  a  series  of  contingency plans to handle various emergency situations at major transport infrastructure such as railways and road tunnels.  In the event of an emergency, TD's Emergency Transport Coordination Centre will activate  the  relevant  contingency  plan  to coordinate all parties concerned to implement temporary traffic and public transport arrangements in response to the closure of the relevant facilities and suspension of services.
- 5.32 EMSD also requires MTRCL to formulate measures  to  cope  with  various  emergencies, including procedures for evacuating passengers from  the  stations as quickly as possible during emergency  situations, such  as  catastrophic flood, and to conduct site inspections and drills on a regular basis.  HyD also regularly reviews and updates the emergency response plans for public  road  facilities  under  its  purview.  The operators  of  government  road  tunnels  and

control areas are responsible for the management, operation and maintenance of the tunnels and control areas, including the drainage  facilities  and  equipment,  to  ensure  their normal operation.

<!-- image -->

The Government conducts inter-departmental exercises to strengthen emergency responses

Water level sensor can provide real-time monitoring of the water level at rivers and channels

<!-- image -->

TD's  Emergency  Transport  Coordination  Centre  monitors  traffic conditions and handles various emergency situations

<!-- image -->

## Chapter 6 OPPORTUNITIES

Can onell but array of opportunities in green economy.

Hong  Kong's  target  to  achieve  carbon  neutrality  in less than 30 years will undoubtedly bring a myriad of challenges and difficulties,  but  it  will  also  open  up new  opportunities for Hong  Kong. Measures  to decarbonise and to adapt to climate change will not only  bring  about  sustainable  improvement  to  the environment, but will also drive the development of a green economy, create job opportunities and promote recycling, EVs, new energy transport and their

supporting industries.

a green recovery. We estimate that the resources to be devoted by the Government in the next few years can create more than 10 000 job opportunities. Hong Kong  must  grasp  the  new  momentum  for  growth brought about by the low-carbon transformation, and seize the collaborative opportunities with neighbouring regions  to  foster  more  diversified  and  sustainable development.

## Green Economy and Employment Opportunities

- 6.1 Countries  around  the  world  are  promoting low-carbon transformation as the awareness of environmental protection among people continue to grow. This is driving the development of a green economy in areas such as the application of new energy, energy saving and environmental  protection, new energy vehicles and other green industries, and has brought new investment and plentiful job opportunities.  In pursuit of carbon neutrality in Hong Kong, the Government and all sectors of the society will allocate substantial financial resources to formulate and implement measures to promote energy saving, clean energy, green infrastructure, electrification of transport, waste reduction and recycling, etc., which  will  not  only  bring  about  continuous improvement  to  the  environment,  but  also  an array of opportunities in green economy.
- 6.2 We estimate that in the next 15 to 20 years, the Government's expenditure on various measures to combat climate change may reach $240  billion.  Various  private  enterprises  are also expected to invest heavily in decarbonisation.    The  enormous  demand for financing will accelerate the development of green bonds and other green and sustainable financial products in Hong Kong. Apart from encouraging investment from both the public and private sectors, the  decarbonisation transformation will also stimulate and sustain the development of Hong Kong's green economy, support the emergence of  green  finance  technology,  expedite  circular economy  and  re-industrialisation, and even create tens of thousands of job opportunities in green industries such as energy supply, recycling, EVs, new energy transport and their supporting industries.

The process of achieving carbon neutrality will stimulate and sustain the development of Hong Kong's green economy

<!-- image -->

## Regional Centre for Green Finance

6.3 The  Outline  Development  Plan  for  the Guangdong-Hong  Kong-Macao  Greater Bay Area released in 2019 supported Hong Kong to develop itself into a green finance centre in the GBA and set up internationally recognised green  bond  certification  institutions.    The Outline of the 14th Five-Year Plan for National Economic  and  Social  Development  of  the People's Republic of China and the Long-Range Objectives Through the Year 2035 (the  14th  Five-Year  Plan)  approved  this  year also reaffirmed its support for Hong Kong to enhance its status as an international financial centre.  In recent years, the flourishing green finance business and the increasing demand for  green  and  sustainable  financial  products have  brought  new  investment  opportunities. As  an  international  financial  centre,  Hong Kong has a large financial market and a sound world-class regulatory framework, bringing together  global  leading  financial  and  professional institutions,  green  assessment  and certification  bodies  as  well  as  international investors.  With these strengths and advantages, Hong Kong is well placed to develop into a green finance hub in the region and serve as a premier financing platform for green enterprises and projects, and play an important role in combating climate change.

- 6.4 Huge financial resources are required to achieve carbon neutrality.  We should strive to develop various financing tools to attract more funds  to  projects  that  can  help  decarbonisation.  The Government launched the GGBP in 2018  to  provide  funding  for  Government's green  projects.    With  the  support  from  the LegCo in July 2021, the Government doubled the  borrowing  ceiling  from  HK$100  billion  to HK$200  billion  and  expanded  the  funding scope to a wider variety of green projects not limited to public works projects.  We plan to issue green bonds further, totalling  some HK$175.5  billion  within  the  next  five  years from  2021-22,  having  regard  to  the  market situation.  We also plan to pilot the issuance of green bonds that involves more types of currencies,  project  types  and  issuance  channels, thereby  further  enriching  the  green  finance ecosystem  in  Hong  Kong. In  view  of  the growing interest of the general public in green and sustainable development, the Government is also planning to issue retail green bonds to provide opportunities for  members  of  the public  to  take  part  in  green  finance,  thereby raising  public  awareness  of  and  interest  in green and sustainable finance.  The GGBP not only provides funding for Government's green projects,  but  also  consolidates  Hong  Kong's position as a leading bond market in Asia and a green finance hub in the region.

HKSAR Government's Green Bond Reports

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

As an international financial centre, Hong Kong has the conditions and advantages to develop into a green finance hub in the region

Green Bond

Report 2020

Green Bond

Report 2021

.......

investor education.

Hong Kong's Green and Sustainable

Finance Strategy vant sectors no later tran

Adopt Con

Support work of

TRO foundation on

HKEX

Disclosurel menello cile

## The Green and Sustainable Finance Cross-Agency Steering Group

Established  in  May  2020,  the  Green  and Sustainable Finance Cross-Agency Steering Group (the Steering Group) is co-chaired by the Hong Kong Monetary Authority and the Securities and Futures Commission, with members comprising ENB, the Financial Services and the Treasury  Bureau,  Hong  Kong  Exchanges  and Clearing Limited (HKEX), the Insurance Authority and the Mandatory Provident Fund Schemes Authority.  The  Steering  Group  aims  to  coordinate  the  management of climate and environmental risks to the financial sector, accelerate the growth of green and sustainable finance in Hong  Kong  and  support  the  Government's climate  strategies.    The  Steering  Group  will focus its work on climate-related disclosures and sustainability reporting, carbon market opportunities and the work of the Centre for Green and Sustainable Finance, with a view to consolidating Hong Kong's leading position in green and

## Carbon trading

Carbon markets are expected to grow significantly  as  the  Mainland  and  other  key  overseas markets pursue the transition to a green and low-carbon  economy.    There  are  currently  a number of emission trading systems (ETS) in the world, including the European Union ETS, Tokyo ETS, the eight pilot ETSs in the Mainland (i.e. Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, Chongqing, Hubei, Guangdong, Shenzhen and Fujian) and the country's national ETS in Shanghai, which was officially launched in July 2021.

presented  by  both  the  compliance  carbon market  and  the  voluntary  carbon  market  in China and overseas, including the potential size of the carbon  product  market  and  policy support needed.  The study report is expected to be completed in December 2021.

Carbon trading is a pricing tool to set the price for emissions based on market mechanism. It mainly controls the overall emissions by setting emission caps  and  allowing  the  market  to  trade  limited emission permits. Voluntary carbon trading markets  are  mainly  based  on  non-compliance goals  such  as  fulfilling  social  responsibilities, building brands and expanding social benefits, or the self-motivated trading initiated by individuals to offset their carbon emissions, achieve carbon neutral lifestyle and reduce overall emissions.

The Steering Group has set up a Carbon Market Work Stream to assess the feasibility of developing Hong Kong into a regional carbon trading centre,  leveraging  its  unique  advantages  in financial services. Based on the existing pilot ETSs  in  Guangdong,  the  development  of  a unified  carbon  market  in  GBA  will  also  be explored, having regard to the opportunities

Moreover,  HKEX  signed  a  Memorandum  of Understanding with the Guangzhou Futures Exchange (GFEX) in August 2021 for strategic cooperation in promoting sustainability and facilitating the overall development of the GBA. The two parties will focus on supporting the country to peak carbon emissions and reach carbon neutrality, and will jointly explore the feasibility of cooperation  on  product  development  in  both onshore and offshore markets, facilitate collaboration in areas such as clearing and technology, as well as share the resources on marketing and investor education.

HKEX

<!-- image -->

sustainable finance and assist in the transition of the financial ecosystem to carbon neutrality.

Hong Kong's Green and Sustainable Finance Strategy

<!-- image -->

explore the teasibility or blending nyarogen and natural gas for electricity generation

bonisation plan or the power station.

----==-==--

## Regional Cooperation in Innovation and Technology

- 6.5 Technological development plays a pivotal role in achieving  carbon  neutrality.    The  Government will continue to step up promotion of I&amp;T development and re-industrialisation, encourage R&amp;D on and trial of decarbonisation technologies with a view to facilitating their application in different areas.    In  2020,  the  Government  allocated $200 million for setting up the Green Tech Fund to  provide  better  and  more  focused  funding support for R&amp;D projects which can help Hong Kong decarbonise and enhance environmental protection, thereby helping Hong Kong pursue the target of striving to achieve carbon neutrality. While  supporting  local  I&amp;T  development,  we may also explore growth opportunities through cooperation with neighbouring regions, such as strengthening exchanges and collaboration with cities in the GBA  in  building low-carbon communities,  developing  decarbonisation technologies,  promoting  low-carbon  products and nurturing talent.
- 6.6 The 14th Five-Year Plan promulgated this year has put forward for the first time the support for  Hong  Kong  to  develop  into  a  regional intellectual property (IP) trading centre and an international  I&amp;T  hub,  thereby  recognising Hong  Kong's  potential for  I&amp;T  development; and has named  green and environmental protection  technology  as  one  of  the  strategic emerging industries. Hong Kong's international business environment, comprehensive IP

protection regime, and well-developed service sectors  such  as  financial,  maritime,  trading and  legal  services,  have  created  extremely favourable  conditions  for  developing  green technologies.    Hong  Kong  may  continue  to leverage its diverse strengths and  unique position  to  seek  further  development.  We  have been striving to enhance I&amp;T cooperation with the Mainland,  including  R&amp;D  funding  schemes and demonstration projects under the theme of  green  technology.    Hong  Kong  and  the adjoining GBA cities may complement one another with their own strengths to achieve synergy, with a view to developing an I&amp;T upstream, midstream  and  downstream  industrial  chain, thus contributing to our country's advancement towards carbon neutrality.

- 6.7 Regional cooperation is also the key to achieving low-carbon electricity generation in Hong Kong.  Hong Kong's RE development has been limited  by  its  geographical  constraints.    To increase    the  use  of  zero-carbon  energy,  we need  to cooperate with neighbouring regions to develop more effective zero-carbon energy of a larger scale. With technological advancement and the large-scale development of RE in the Mainland in particular, Hong Kong may explore the  feasibility of developing  new  offshore projects,  such  as  joint  ventures  in  electricity projects by the power enterprises of Hong Kong and the Mainland.

## Trial of hydrogen energy for electricity generation

To prepare for the future adoption of new energy  for  electricity  generation,  CLP  and GE  have  signed  an  agreement  to  jointly explore the feasibility of blending hydrogen and natural gas for electricity generation at Black Point Power Station with a view to using 100% hydrogen as fuel for electricity generation ultimately to support the decarbonisation plan of the power station.

Black Point Power Station

<!-- image -->

as te

er vill

гу.

an fy

re

U- throughout their life cycle.

The InnoCell located in the Science Park is Hong Kong's first batch of high-rise building projects adopting MiC method

<!-- image -->

## Green Planning and Carbon-neutral Community

- 6.8 The  cityscape  and  development  approach  of Hong Kong is expected to undergo transformation in  tandem  with  the  trend  towards  carbon neutrality.  Currently, government departments would,  apart  from  developing  housing  and community facilities, strive to build low-carbon liveable communities when implementing planned new development areas (NDAs), such as Hung Shui Kiu/Ha Tsuen, Kwu Tung North and Tung Chung New Town Extension.  Examples  include  building  DCSs  to  reduce  energy demand; adopting green and sustainable design in buildings as far as possible to reduce energy consumption; providing railway services and installing charging networks for EVs at an early stage; saving energy through proper land use planning and building layout; providing the public  with  green  mobility  options,  such  as walking  and  cycling;  and  setting  up  waste separation and recycling facilities in the community. The two strategic growth areas (SGAs) under planning (i.e. New Territories North and artificial  islands  in  the  Central  Waters)  will indeed  adopt  the  target  of  carbon  neutrality. As  Hong  Kong  continues  to  switch  to  clean energy  for  electricity  generation  and  electrify transport,  all  NDAs  and  the  two  SGAs  are aspired to be further enhanced to carbon-neutral communities in the medium and long run.
- 6.9 In  planning  for  new  development  areas  and urban renewal projects,  the  choice  of  design and  construction  methods  should  be  considered  from  the  environmental  perspective  to reduce  embodied  carbon  emissions  during  the construction process. The Government will continue to adopt, and encourage the construction sector to follow suit, Modular Integrated Construction (MiC) method in suitable projects by  carrying  out  most  of  the  operations  at construction sites in off-site prefabrication yards, thereby simplifying the construction process  and  reducing  construction  wastes. More electrical machinery will also be used at construction sites to reduce carbon emissions and other pollution, with a view to alleviating the  impact  of  buildings  on  the  environment throughout their life cycle.

Fire  Services  Department  Pak  Shing  Kok  Married  Quarters  in Tseung Kwan O is the first batch of high-rise concrete MiC buildings in Hong Kong

<!-- image -->

adjacent wetland and bird habitat. The design of the Park is in line with the target of achieving

-HONG KONG 0

## 'Hong Kong 2030+: Towards a Planning Vision and Strategy Transcending 2030' (Hong Kong 2030+)

Hong Kong 2030+ represents the Government's staunch  commitment  to  responding  to  local needs  and  aspirations  and  fostering  inclusive growth,  while  capitalising  on  the  opportunities brought  by  the  GBA  development  and  at  the same time contributing  to  a  world-class  GBA. Our vision for Hong Kong is for it to be a liveable, competitive and sustainable "Asia's World City".  At the strategic planning level, Hong Kong 2030+ advocates a capacity-creating approach to ensure  sustainable  growth.  This  approach  is underpinned by the capacity to create developable land, transport and other essential infrastructure  in  a  visionary  manner  alongside continuous  efforts  to  enhance  environmental capacity.  During the planning and development process,  the  Government  will  ensure  that  our city  is  adequately  supported  by  infrastructure that is smart, green and resilient, thereby providing uninterrupted and convenient services to the community,  while  at  the  same  time  achieving environmental sustainability and a future-proof city.  For example, it will foster smart mobility through technologies and strive to explore wider use of RE and waste-to-energy initiatives to help reduce  energy  consumption  and  carbon  emissions, whilst enhancing the resilience of infrastructure to combat climate change.

The vision of Hong Kong 2030+ is for Hong Kong to be a liveable, competitive and sustainable city

<!-- image -->

## Hong Kong-Shenzhen Innovation and Technology Park

Located  in  the  Lok  Ma  Chau  Loop,  the  Hong Kong-Shenzhen Innovation and Technology Park has reserved about 30% of its area for greening to complement the ecological environment of the adjacent wetland and bird habitat. The design of the Park is in line with the target of achieving carbon neutrality before 2050 with adoption of smart and environmentally friendly features, such as a solid waste recycling system.  A DCS will be built in the Park and it is expected that at least 50 million kWh of electricity can be saved each year upon its full commissioning.

Lok Ma Chau Loop

<!-- image -->

Lok Ma Chau Loop

50 million kWh of electricity can be saved each year upon its full commissioning.

February 2021

WASTE

BLUEPRINT

for Hong Kong

2035

Hong Kong

ROADMAP ON

POPULARISATION

OF ELECTRIC

VEHICLES

March 2021

CLEAN

AIR

2035

PLAN

for Hong Kong l

October 2021

Hong Kong's

CLIMATE

ACTION

PLAN 2050

## Concluding Remarks

The UN's IPCC had issued a global red alert in its report released in August this year.  The world must take concerted actions to achieve deep decarbonisation without delay.  As a member of the global village, Hong Kong must set for itself ambitious deep decarbonisation targets.

Achieving carbon neutrality before 2050 is extremely challenging.  Among the various decarbonisation strategies, increasing the use of zero-carbon energy for electricity generation is the key.  It can thoroughly address two-thirds of Hong Kong's carbon emissions while providing zero-carbon energy for the electrified transport. With the provision of all necessary waste-to-energy facilities to replace the development of new landfills, Hong Kong would be able to achieve deep decarbonisation.  That said, to achieve carbon neutrality, public support is necessary for the promotion of low-carbon transformation through energy saving and waste reduction and recycling, etc. in our daily lives.

Combating climate change is a long-term task requiring persistent efforts.  We will, in line with the spirit of the Paris Agreement, conduct a review every five years to finetune and improve the decarbonisation measures, having regard to the latest developments of various zero-carbon technologies.  The Steering Committee on Climate Change and Carbon Neutrality under the chairmanship of the Chief Executive will continue to steer various bureaux and departments in implementing policies and measures on decarbonisation and combating extreme weather, as well as the development of green finance, I&amp;T and capacity building, etc., so as to provide the capital, technologies and talent necessary for combating climate change.

For the well-being of the future generations, the Government will work hand in hand with the public and various sectors to promote low-carbon transformation in Hong Kong in our quest for carbon neutrality before 2050.

<!-- image -->

June 2021

## Annex: Decarbonisation Strategies and Actions

## Decarbonisation Target

## Setting a target for total carbon emissions

The Government is committed to achieving carbon neutrality before 2050 by implementing four main strategies of 'net-zero electricity generation', 'energy saving  and  green  buildings',  'green  transport'  and  'waste  reduction'.  A  new medium-term target of reducing the total carbon emissions by half from the 2005 level before 2035 (i.e. reducing the total carbon emissions from 40 million tonnes in 2005 to nearly 20 million tonnes in 2035) has been set.

## Four Major Decarbonisation Strategies

| Net-Zero Electricity Generation                | Net-Zero Electricity Generation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
|------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Carbon neutrality in electricity genera- tion  | The Government will achieve the long-term target of net-zero electricity generation before 2050 by increasing zero-carbon electricity supply through renewable energy (RE) development, and exploring new energy sources for electricity generation and regional cooperation.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Phasing out coal-fired electricity generation  | By 2035, we will cease using coal for daily electricity generation and will only keep it for providing backup support. Coal will be replaced by natural gas and zero-car- bon energy (including RE and nuclear energy) for electricity generation.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Developing RE                                  | The Government will strive to grapple with Hong Kong's geographical and environmen- tal constraints in driving the development of RE by taking the lead in installing RE systems at various buildings and facilities, and developing more advanced waste-to-energy facilities. The Government will further consider measures to facilitate the development of RE by the private sector which can, coupled with the FiT Scheme, foster the development of RE. In addition, the Government and the two power companies are reviewing proposals to develop wind farms. The Government will strive to increase the share of RE in the fuel mix for electrici- ty generation from less than 1% at present to 7.5% to 10% by 2035, and further increase it to 15% subsequently through facilitating local projects, regional coop- eration and joint ventures, etc. |
| Generating electricity with zero-carbon energy | The Government will explore and try out the use of different types of zero-carbon energy for electricity generation with a view to adopting them in Hong Kong when the technologies become relatively mature. The Government will also explore ways to enhance regional cooperation to increase the supply of zero-carbon energy. The target is to increase the share of zero-carbon energy in the fuel mix for electricity generation to around 60% to 70% before 2035, and to achieve net-zero electricity generation in Hong Kong before 2050 with the support of continuous technological advancement in using zero-carbon energy for electricity generation.                                                                                                                                                                                             |

## Energy Saving and Green Buildings

| Energy saving targets                                                         | The Government has set more ambitious energy saving targets for buildings. Using the operational conditions of 2015 as the comparison basis, we aim to gradually reduce the electricity consumption of new and existing commercial buildings by 30% to 40%, and that of residential buildings by 20% to 30% by 2050; and reduce the electricity consumption of new and existing commercial buildings by 15% to 20%, and that of residential buildings by 10% to 15% by 2035.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Enhancing energy efficiency performance of buildings                          | The Government will explore the possibility of expanding the scope of regulation to cover all buildings with high energy consumption, such as data centres, with reference to international standards and innovative and intelligent technologies. The Government will collaborate with the trades and stakeholders to continue to explore acceptance of different forms and accredited certification schemes as registration requirements so that more buildings can achieve energy efficiency performance above the statutory requirements. More green innovations and energy efficient elements will also be added to the design of new government buildings to achieve an energy efficiency performance of 10% above the statutory standards. |
| Improving energy efficiency of commercial and residential buildings           | To reduce electricity consumption of air-conditioning for commercial buildings and hotels, the Government plans to complete a review for tightening up the statutory standards of Overall Thermal Transfer Value (OTTV) before 2025. The Government also plans to complete two reviews on the Residential Thermal Transfer Value (RTTV) before 2023 and 2030. To lead by example, the OTTV of new government buildings will be at least 10% above the statutory standards.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Development of district cooling system (DCS)                                  | On infrastructure development, the Government will integrate energy efficient facilities in development projects. Following the construction of DCS in the Kai Tak Development, construction works of two more DCS projects in Tung Chung New Town Extension (East) and Kwu Tung North New Development Area have commenced. The Government will study the feasibility of incorporating DCSs in more new development areas, such as the Hung Shui Kiu/Ha Tsuen New Develop- ment Area and the artificial islands in Central Waters, etc. Moreover,we will further enhance the energy efficiency performance of DCSs, including the applica- tion of big data and artificial intelligence to optimise the operation of the facilities.              |
| Greater use of energy management tools                                        | The Government will consider conducting energy audits more frequently and mandating the implementation of identified energy management opportunities, and strengthening the promotion of retro-commissioning. We will consider requiring large commercial buildings to carry out regular commissioning for the air-condition- ing systems and major building services installations to achieve the optimal opera- tional efficiency. To mobilise the community to take collective actions to conserve energy, we also plan to facilitate the comparison of building energy consumption performance through releasing energy data and introducing energy benchmarking tools.                                                                       |
| Keeping the Mandatory Energy Efficiency Labelling Scheme (MEELS) under review | The Government will keep the MEELS under review. Apart from upgrading the grading standards, we will consider setting a minimum energy efficiency require- ment for specified appliances before they can be supplied in Hong Kong. We will also consider expanding the scope of MEELS to cover non-domestic or commercial appliances.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

| Green Transport                                                    | Green Transport                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Zero carbon emissions from transport                               | The Government strives to achieve the long-term target of zero carbon emissions from vehicles and the transport sector before 2050 through the electrification of vehicles and ferries, development of new energy public transport and measures to improve traffic management.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Phasing out of fuel-propelled vehicles progressively               | In the Hong Kong Roadmap on Popularisation of Electric Vehicles announced in 2021, the Government set the target to cease the new registration of fuel-pro- pelled and hybrid private cars in 2035 or earlier. The Government will proactively develop a charging network and supporting infrastructure to promote the develop- ment of EVs, and will phase out fuel-propelled vehicles progressively.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Trial and application of new energy transport                      | The Government will actively promote the development of various electric and other new energy public transport and commercial vehicles, with a view to setting a more concrete way forward and timetable in around 2025. The Government will collaborate with the franchised bus companies and other stakeholders in the next 3 years to test out hydrogen fuel cell electric buses and heavy vehicles. In addition, the Government will subsidise ferry operators to conduct trials for electric and hybrid ferries. Subject to the trial results and relevant technological developments, the Government will explore with the ferry operators the possibility of progressively replacing traditional ferries with new energy ferries before 2035. To tie in with the application of new energy in various means of transport, government departments will step up efforts to support and facilitate the development of relevant infrastructure and ancillary facilities. |
| Maintaining a public transport system with railway as the backbone | The Government will continue the current approach of maintaining a public transport system with railway as the backbone, and promote cycling for short-distance commuting and enhance walkability. The Government will also adopt different new technologies as well as traffic management measures, such as the Free-flow Tolling System and 'congestion charging' with a view to charging different toll levels according to the traffic condition of the tunnels and the control area at different times. The Government commenced a traffic survey in September 2021 to collect the latest data, and aim to draw up preliminary proposals for 'conges- tion charging' in 2022.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Waste Reduction                                                    | Waste Reduction                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Carbon neutrality in waste management                              | The Government will develop adequate waste-to-energy facilities, and press ahead with the promotion of waste reduction, separation and recycling with a view to moving away from reliance on landfills for municipal waste disposal. This will significantly reduce the carbon emissions from landfills, contributing to achieving the target of carbon neutrality in waste management before 2050.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Promoting waste reduction and recycling                            | The Government will implement MSW charging as well as other waste reduction and recycling initiatives, including expanding and enhancing the central collection and the community recycling network for food waste, waste plastics and waste paper to encourage different sectors and members of the public to practise waste reduction and recovery. Our medium-term target is to gradually reduce the per capita MSW disposal by 40% to 45% and raise the recovery rate to about 55%.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

| Supporting low-carbon transformation of the recycling trade   | The Government will further support the recycling trade to transform to higher value-added production and achieve re-industrialisation and circular economy through the adoption of technologies, with a view to consolidating and strengthening their downstream recovery, recycling and waste-to-resources capabilities.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|---------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Developing waste-to-energy facilities                         | The Government will strive to develop adequate advanced waste-to-energy facili- ties, including another integrated waste management facility, by 2035 with a view to moving away from reliance on landfills for municipal waste disposal. The Government will continue to expand food waste recycling infrastructure, and make use of the biogas generated during the food waste treatment process as an additional source of RE. In addition, landfill gases from the three operating landfills will continue to be recycled to provide thermal energy and electricity for landfill operation and export to the town gas supply network and power grids to provide energy for the public. |
| Controlling the use of single-use plastics                    | The Government will continue to adopt a multi-pronged approach to support the turning of waste plastics into resources, including formulating suitable policies and regulations, stepping up publicity, and developing further waste plastics recycling supporting facilities, as well as promoting the replacement of single-use plastics with reusable or alternative materials. The Government will regulate disposable plastic tableware in phases from 2025.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

| Opportunities                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|---------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Green economy                   | Onthe way to achieve carbon neutrality in HongKong, the Government and all sectors of society will allocate substantial financial resources to formulate and implement measures to promote energy saving, clean energy, green infrastructure, electrification of transport, waste reduction and recycling, etc., which will facilitate continuous improvement to the environment and create an array of green economic opportunities.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Green finance                   | As an international financial centre, Hong Kong has a large financial market and a sound world-class regulatory framework, bringing together global leading financial and professional institutions, green assessment and certification bodies as well as international investors. Hong Kong is well placed to develop into a green finance hub in the region and serve as a premier financing platform for green enterprises and projects.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Innovation and technology (I&T) | The 14th Five-Year Plan has put forward for the first time the support for Hong Kong to develop into an international I&T hub. The Government will step up efforts to promote I&T development and re-industrialisation, promote the R&D and trial of decarbonisation technologies to facilitate their application in different areas.We will also identify development opportunities through cooperation with neighbour- ing regions with a view to strengthening exchanges and collaborations in various areas, such as development of low-carbon communities with cities in the GBA, exploring decarbonisation technologies and nurturing talent.                                                                                                                             |
| Carbon-neutral community        | The two strategic growth areas under planning, i.e. New Territories North and artificial islands in the Central Waters, will adopt the target of carbon neutrality. The Government would also strive to build low-carbon liveable communities when implementing planned new development areas. Examples include building DCSs to reduce energy demand; adopting green and sustainable design in buildings as far as possible to reduce energy consumption; providing railway services andinstalling charging networks for EVs at an early stage; saving energy through proper land use planning and building layout; providing the public with green mobility options (such as walking and cycling); and setting up waste separation and recycling facilities in the community. |

| Steering and                             | Coordination                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Whole-government approach                | The Steering Committee on Climate Change and Carbon Neutrality under the chairmanship of the Chief Executive was established in mid-2021 to adopt a whole-government approach to formulate the holistic strategies and steer various actions and collaborations. To monitor the effective implementation of the follow-up actions, ENB will set up the Office of Climate Change and Carbon Neutrality to strengthen the coordination and promotion of deep decarbonisation work. ENB set up an inter-departmental Carbon Neutrality Task Force in mid-2021 to keep abreast of the high-end development of decarbonisation technologies globally. |
| Climate Budget                           | Climate Budget                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Climate change mitigation and adaptation | The Government plans to devote about $240 billion in the next 15 to 20 years to implement the four major decarbonisation strategies of 'net-zero electricity genera- tion' , 'energy saving and green buildings' , 'green transport' and 'waste reduction', and take forward various measures to mitigate and adapt to climate change.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Participation for All                    | Participation for All                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Dedicated advisory committee             | The Government will explore the establishment of a dedicated advisory committee for tackling climate change through the integration of the existing advisory platforms, so as to encourage different sectors in the community, including our young generation, to actively participate in climate actions.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Practising low-carbon lifestyle          | The Government, business sectors, schools and non-governmental organisations must work together and set an example for promoting and encouraging the public to adopt and practise a low-carbon lifestyle.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Education and Training                   | Education and Training                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Enriching learning content               | The Government will broaden school teachers' knowledge about climate change. Schools may strengthen the relevant learning materials in different subjects and provide diversified learning experiences to enhance students' awareness of climate change and its impacts, encourage the students to practise what they have learned, and promote low-carbon transformation.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Capacity building                        | To nurture talent, learning materials relating to climate change, low-carbon technologies and green finance, etc. should be added to the relevant curricula of the universities and tertiary institutions. Cooperation and exchange among universi- ties and tertiary institutions should be enhanced, so that both teachers and students can equip themselves with up-to-date and relevant professional knowl- edge and skills.                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

METRI

Zero-carbon Liveable Sustainable Emissions City Development